Introduction to IIT Jodhpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur was established in 2008 to foster technology education and research in India. The Institute is committed to technological thought and action to benefit the economic development of the country. Scholarship in teaching and learning, scholarship in research and creative accomplishments, and relevance to industry are the three driving forces at IIT Jodhpur.

IIT Jodhpur functions from its sprawling residential permanent campus of 852 acres on National Highway 65, north-northwest of Jodhpur towards Nagaur. This campus is meticulously planned and envisioned to stand as a symbol of academics – simple yet profound.

The Institute is committed to a multidisciplinary approach to technology development. Hence, it has established state-of-the-art laboratories for basic research and has organised its academic degree programs through departments, while coordinating research activities through Centers for Technologies.


Vision and Mission
Vision

A future-driven institute for nurturing excellence of thought; creating, preserving, and imparting knowledge; and using transformational technologies/interventions with a multidisciplinary approach for responding to societal challenges and aspirations.


Mission

    Foster humanitarian values, passion for learning, and creativity in faculty and students
    Move towards a high-quality, futuristic educational and research ecosystem
    Develop socially responsible faculty, students, and future leaders, committed to creating a self-reliant India
    Catalyze a professional internal culture, along with enabling infrastructure and ancillary services
    Forge effective national as well as international collaboration and partnership with industry and academia for diverse purposes and activities.


Goals

    Curriculum: To assimilate balanced, broad-based, as well as specialized education in all curricula with opportunities for different kinds of students and their interests.
    Pedagogy: To establish systems for dynamic development, implementation, and evaluation of futuristic pedagogy, including blended-hybrid teaching and experiential learning.
    Research: Have a globally engaged research ecosystem with state-of-the-art facilities in place, for attaining leadership in research on academic, social, national, and industrial fronts while capitalizing on emerging and in-demand opportunities.
    Outreach: To be the Institute of Choice for a lifelong learning journey of working professionals, alumni, and the community.
    Institutional Collaboration: Have an efficient platform in place for forging impactful partnerships with academia, research institutes, business organizations, civil society, governments, and other agencies across the world for contributing to larger goals for humanity.
    Industry Connect: Ensure ease of collaboration with industry for joint research/ projects, IPR development, technology transfer, and encouraging entrepreneurship/ startups, along with efficient supporting infrastructure and systems.
    Financial Plan: Set up innovative resource mobilization mechanisms and expenditure management systems, embedded in the internal budgetary processes, to have ample resources/ funds for actualizing the institute’s vision and goals.
    Infrastructure: The institute will have secure, evolving, futuristic digital and physical infrastructure and ancillary services to meet all its needs, along with knowledge infrastructure for supporting learning and enabling skill development.
    Student Life Cycle: Students will find at IIT Jodhpur (i) a vibrant learning environment, with opportunities for excelling in curricular, co-curricular and extracurricular activities, (ii) an effective career development process for their successful initiation to the professions of their choice and (iii) a strong linkage with alumni through regular interactions, support for their lifelong learning and professional development; and enabling their active participation as a stakeholder in the affairs of the institute.
    Agile Organization: Ensure that IITJ continues to be an agile organization for both stability and dynamism as a network of teams with a people-centric culture that operates through fast but considered decision cycles, which are enabled by technology, and guided by a powerful common purpose to co-create value for all stakeholders of the institute.


History

Way back in 1946, visionary leaders in the country conceived the idea of establishing Higher Technical Institutes to support post-war industrial development in India. A committee, headed by Nalini Ranjan Sarkar, recommended the establishment of these institutes in various parts of India. The first Indian Institute of Technology was founded in May 1950 at Kharagpur. Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of India, at the first convocation of IIT Kharagpur in 1956, clarified in his address that these institutes of technology would help meet the technological challenges of the nation.

During 1959-1960, four IITs were established at Bombay, Delhi, Kanpur, and Madras. Subsequently, on 15 September 1961, the Parliament of India passed an act known as the Institutes of Technology Act, declaring IIT Kharagpur as an institute of national importance. Also, IIT Kharagpur was given the status of an autonomous university. Thereafter, IIT Guwahati started in 1994, and the then University of Roorkee was given the status of an IIT (now called IIT Roorkee) in 2001.

The establishment of eight more IITs across the country began with a decision of the Cabinet, which was announced by the Minister of Human Resource Development on 28 March 2008. IIT Bhubaneswar, IIT Gandhinagar, IIT Hyderabad, IIT Jodhpur (earlier called IIT Rajasthan), IIT Patna, and IIT Ropar began functioning in 2008, while two others, IIT Indore and IIT Mandi, commenced their sessions in 2009.

During the past decades, since 1956, IITs have become a hallmark of quality technology undergraduate education internationally, attributed largely to the ambience of quality academics. The endeavor at IIT Jodhpur is to uphold this brand image, which has been meticulously built over the last 60 years, with a renewed focus on producing world-class, technology-driven graduates who will contribute to the nation's development.


Welcome to the Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering

The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur, established in 2009 offers a B.Tech. program in Bioengineering, an M.Tech. and M.Tech-Ph.D. dual degree programs in Bioscience & Bioengineering. Our programs are uniquely designed to inspire innovations in biotechnology, engineering, and medicine from an understanding of  biological systems.  This capacity building is assuming importance in the present times for providing solutions to societal problems in trans-disciplinary frameworks. A major focus is on neurosciences and neurodegenerative disorders, mechanistic biology, environmental and medical microbiology, computational biology, precision health, and bioprospecting for novel molecules and bio-actives from natural resources of the Thar ecoregion. We also offer a competitive Ph.D. program to inculcate scientific temper, independent thinking, and skillsets for scientific entrepreneurship. We encourage and provide avenues for the participation of bioengineering graduates with diverse engineering disciplines to develop technologies for:

    Affordable and Smart Healthcare
    Clean Environment
    Precision Medicine and Health
    Sustainable and Affordable Energy

Faculties at the department with wide-ranging expertise,  conduct fundamental and translational research in focus areas that are contemporary and aligned to major sustainable development goals. We are passionate about research and actively communicate our science through regular outreach programs.

Message from the Head of the Department

Bioscience and Bioengineering are pivotal to India's growth. driving innovation and advancing technology in healthcare. Agriculture and environmental sustainability. The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur plays a key role in implementing diverse advanced biological research areas within these fields. with a strong focus on fostering research and development (R&D) and entrepreneurship.

By offering a multidisciplinary platform that integrates cutting-edge research in drug discovery, genomics, and affordable and integrative precision healthcare solutions. Big Data Biology and bioinformatics. In addition. The department actively promotes entrepreneurship by providing incubation support, facilitating industry collaborations, and encouraging the growth of startup ventures in biosciences.

With access to advanced research facilities and guidance from expert faculty members, students can transform their ideas into practical, marketable solutions, benefiting industries such as healthcare, agriculture, and biomanufacturing.

BSBE Department, IIT Jodhpur, emphasizes interdisciplinary research in the near future, which may also align with national initiatives like the BioE3 policy to promote R&D, commercialization, and the establishment of bioeconomy hubs. The curriculum is thoughtfully designed to meet the diverse aspirations of students entering the fields of biosciences and bioengineering. This approach not only strengthens the academic peers ecosystem but also creates employment opportunities and enhances societal well-being.

Undergraduate Program
B. Tech in Bioengineering

Duration: 4 years
 
Introduction


Every life form, beginning from microscopic bacteria to multicellular organisms, can be considered as a system that has been perfected over millennia by Evolution. Beginning from thermodynamically efficient cellular processes to the molecular motors driving the bacterial flagella, each product of evolution is an optimized engineering design that can be translated into real-life applications across disciplines. Today’s interdisciplinary biology is well complemented by engineering domains including electronics, computer science, mechanics, and materials engineering.  Computational biology, for example, permits solving biology problems using statistical, artificial intelligence and machine learning approaches. Extensive use of computational biology is essential in data-driven approaches including Genomics, Proteomics, Transcriptomics, and Metabolomics. This amalgamation of biology and computer science has transformed the landscape of the infectious and non-infectious diseases research allowing the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic modalities. Today’s disease diagnosis is much more specific and sensitive, thanks to biosensors, which have far-reaching applications not only in healthcare but also in the environment, energy, and agriculture. Some applications include in-situ biosensors for human biochemical parameters, environmental contaminants, soil moisture, soil physicochemical parameters, etc. Advances in Biology have not only permitted the early diagnosis of disease but have also contributed abundantly to therapeutic interventions. It is now possible to intervene in diseases taking a multi-pronged approach, including the development of new drugs; production of recombinant therapeutics; development of implantable sensors, control systems; and editing genetic defects. Similarly, synthetic biology and genome editing tools have enabled the development of industrially important organisms for biofuel production as well as environmental remediation. Together, these technologies have significantly contributed to extending the healthy lifespan of the human race and have shown promise towards food, water, and energy security. In other words, bioengineering as a discipline has evolved to a great extent in last couple of decades and now demands a different intellectual outlook and scientific understanding for its further study.  Therefore, an undergraduate academic program in Bioengineering should reflect this rapid evolution of the discipline, underlying scientific and technological advancements and interdisciplinary cross-talk so as to capture the mind of the next generation.

The Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur is committed to achieving excellence in shaping the young minds of tomorrow with a unique blend of teaching techniques and hands-on research-based learning. The Institute works towards the holistic development of students allowing them to be able to assume leadership positions in Industry, Academia, and Entrepreneurial ventures. The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering is committed to this goal and has developed academic programs that are interdisciplinary in nature and include a substantial component of courses from other science and engineering Departments. The Department aspires to produce Graduates, who can develop solutions to tackle local and global problems related to healthcare, energy, environment, water, and food.
 
Objectives of the program

 

The B. Tech. program in Bioengineering at IIT Jodhpur aims to equip our graduates with in-depth knowledge and hands-on training in areas that will be relevant for the next decade. The curriculum attempts to deliver theoretical and practical content that will be needed to address societal needs that will challenge our Graduates globally as well as locally. This includes an unconventional and highly interdisciplinary approach towards problem-solving.

The key objectives of this program are:

(i) To provide a strong foundational understanding of the concepts in biology, engineering, mathematics, and allied sciences, enabling students to approach bioengineering problems through interdisciplinary lenses.

(ii) To stimulate the development of disruptive technologies and futuristic research in the domains of healthcare, energy, and the environment.

 
Expected graduate attributes

 

Graduates of the B. Tech program in Bioengineering will:

(i) be able to choose, design, develop and implement engineering solutions to solve technical problems in bioscience and bioengineering using trans-disciplinary knowledge and skill set.

(ii) be able to think out-of-the-box to solve critical challenges and be able to innovate novel technologies for affordable healthcare, clean energy, sustainable agriculture, and a safe environment.

(iii) be able to work effectively as a member and leader in a multi-disciplinary team.

(iv) have the requisite skills and knowledge to be bio-entrepreneurs.

(v) be able to effectively communicate biological/ bioengineering problems and solutions within the professional sphere and with the society at large.

(vi) be committed to high ethical standards in professional and social practices.

 
Learning outcomes

 

Graduates of the B. Tech program in Bioengineering will:

(i) Will have a comprehensive understanding of the essential concepts of bioscience and bioengineering encompassing cell and molecular biology, physiology, immunology, microbiology, genetics, genetic engineering, multi-omics, computational and systems biology.

(ii) Will gain trans-disciplinary knowledge and skillsets pertaining to biosensors, bioimaging, biomedical device development, biomaterials engineering, and drug discovery.

(iii) Will be able to design, develop, and implement technological solutions related to affordable healthcare, clean energy, sustainable agriculture, and a safe environment adopting a trans-disciplinary approach.

(iv) Will gain a strong understanding of the fundamentals of basic science, engineering, designing, computing and will get hands-on training on cutting edge technologies.

(v) Will be able to apply the knowledge of artificial intelligence and machine learning in solving complex biological problems.

(vi) Will learn to think critically to solve complex problems pertaining to bioscience and bioengineering.

(vii) Will develop communication skills (verbal and written) to communicate effectively in the professional and social sphere.

(viii) Will be committed to high ethical standards.

(ix) Will gain the knowledge and skills required to be an innovator-entrepreneur.

 
New skillsets targeted

 

 Ability to:

(i) design and develop AI-based technologies in healthcare, environment, and agriculture.

(ii) analyze the spatial complexity of living systems using imaging and image processing.

(iii) analyze and solve complex problems in the diverse fields of bioscience and bioengineering using omics and systems biology.

(iv) integrate multidisciplinary technologies for the development of lab-on-chip devices, biosensors, and other smart devices.

(v) integrate omics data to quantitative structure-activity relationship for drug discovery and development

(vi) design and develop smart biomaterials using micro- and nano-scale technologies

(vii) design novel strategies for tissue engineering application

(viii) design new therapeutic molecules in silico.

 
B.Tech in Bioengineering with Specialization

Duration: 4 years

 

The students will have the opportunity to choose the specializations while pursuing their regular B. Tech degree. The department is presently offering two specializations (listed below). The department specializations are designed to enable students to cater to the emerging industrial and societal challenges in various domains of Bioengineering. 

    Therapeutic Engineering and Drug Discovery
    Microbial Systems Engineering


Postgraduate Program
Introduction

 

The biological world is full of natural wonders beginning from microscopic bacteria to multicellular organisms. Using a reductionist approach, each organism can be broken down into its subsystems, which continue to provide us with new knowledge on how evolution has perfected these systems over millennia. Conversely, one can also take a systems biology approach and appreciate the whole organism as a system that grows and continuously adapts to the environment. Beginning from thermodynamically efficient cellular systems to the molecular motors of the flagellar motor, each product of evolution is an optimized engineering design that can be translated into real-life applications across disciplines. Furthermore, the call for support from today’s data-driven biology has been answered by advancements in computational biology that permit solving biology problems using artificial intelligence and machine learning approaches. Genomics, proteomics, transcriptomics, and metabolomics have transformed the landscape of infectious and non-infectious diseases allowing the development of new diagnostic measures as well as therapeutics. In combination with active contribution from Electronic, Mechanical, Materials engineering, implantable sensor, and support devices that are biocompatible have significantly contributed to extending the healthy lifespan of the human race. The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering aspires to cater to the technological requirements of the country by conducting high-quality, translatable, and interdisciplinary research in the aforementioned focus areas.

 
Objectives of the program

 

To produce professionals with an in-depth knowledge of biological systems and phenomena, with critical thinking and bioengineering research skills that can be effectively put to use in solving problems in focus domains including Healthcare, Energy, Environment, and Agriculture. The program will help graduates to approach problems in the above focus domains by providing knowledge and hands-on laboratory training in the areas of data-driven multi-omics technologies, artificial intelligence & computational biology, systems biology, imaging-based diagnostics, biomaterials, and bio-therapeutics.

 
Expected graduate attributes

 

Graduates will

    Be able to think critically and solve problems that are necessary for employment in biomedical, biotechnology, pharmaceutical industries, National research labs, and Academic institutions at the global level.
    Develop a sense of ownership on the National missions for technology development, which will cater to societal needs such as affordable healthcare, clean energy, safe environment, and sustainable agriculture.
    Be exceptionally well trained in the laboratory enabling them to conduct high-quality, reproducible research.
    Be able to read, understand, and review intellectual property documents and recognize their rights.
    Be able to express their research ideas and present their data clearly in written and spoken format.
    Develop a strong work ethic and understand ethical considerations in biological research, which are both necessary for high-quality research.
    Develop healthy time management skills to plan and manage laboratory work as well as other miscellaneous research-associated demands on their time to effectively meet deadlines.

 
Learning outcomes

 

 Graduates will

    Be introduced to cutting-edge, interdisciplinary research areas like Diagnostics & Therapeutics development, Instrumentation design & Development, Multi-omics Technologies & Applications, Biomedical Imaging& Image processing, Systems & Synthetic Biology, and Biomaterials Engineering, Artificial Intelligence for biological applications
    Be exposed to common problems that are prevalent in the domains of affordable healthcare, clean energy, safe environment, and sustainable agriculture, allowing them to innovate and develop technological solutions for the same.
    Receive effective, hands-on laboratory training as a part of laboratory courses and short-term research projects that are designed to teach research methodology and common lab techniques.
    Be introduced to Patents and other intellectual property documents, the rights that they grant, and necessary considerations while filing patents/technology that is protected by patents.
    Develop their research communication skills by participating in seminars, journal clubs; manuscript writing, and research grant writing workshops.
    Receive training on building a work ethic by being a part of research groups working towards a common goal. Graduates will also appreciate the ethical and safety considerations while conducting biomedical research.
    Be taught how to prioritize items on their schedule and how to budget time across the spectrum of activities including research and other necessary tasks.


Doctorial Program
Introduction

 

The doctoral program at the Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering (BSBE) permits students to undertake cutting edge research in the fields of Cellular & Molecular Neuroscience,  Bioimaging, Computational Biology & Bioinformatics, Microbial physiology, Genomics, Environmental Biotechnology, Chemical Biology, Structural Biology, Protein Engineering, Centrosome Biology, Immunology, Statistical Genetics, Biomaterials Engineering, Tissue Engineering, Nanomedicine, and Drug Delivery. The doctoral program constitutes the major pillar of the department research in strengthening the journey towards technological solutions healthcare, water, food, and environment.  The department strongly encourages interdisciplinary research in the interface of Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, and Engineering.

 
Objectives of the program

 

The key objectives of the program are:

(i) To unravel the basic functioning of biological systems through cellular and Molecular Biology (Neuroscience).

(ii) To identify novel methods for early diagnosis, novel drugs, and personalized treatments.

(iii) Developing tools and algorithms for biological data management & Drawing epigenetic inferences through the statistical genetics approach.

(iv) To develop smart biomaterials and nanomaterials, nanotheranostics, drug delivery, tissue engineering, sensor platforms for applications in healthcare.

(v) To develop processes for bioenergy and bioremediation.

 
Expected graduate attributes
 

Graduates will

(i) Be able to think critically and solve problems that are necessary for employment in biomedical, biotechnology, pharmaceutical industries, national research labs, and academic institutions at the global level.

(ii) Develop a sense of ownership on the national missions for technology development, which will cater to societal needs in the area of healthcare, energy, food, environment.

(iii) Be exceptionally well trained in the laboratory enabling them to conduct high-quality, reproducible research.

(iv) Be able to read, understand, and review intellectual property documents and recognize their rights.

(v) Be able to express their research ideas and present their data clearly in written and spoken format.

(vi) Develop a strong work ethic and understand ethical considerations in biological research, which are both necessary for high-quality research.

(vii) Develop healthy time management skills to plan and manage laboratory work as well as other miscellaneous research-associated demands on their time to effectively meet deadlines.

 
Learning outcomes

 

Graduates will

(i) Be introduced to cutting-edge, interdisciplinary research areas like cellular and Molecular Neuroscience, Novel drug development, Bio-Imaging, Systems & Synthetic Biology, Bioelectrochemical systems, bioenergy systems, and Biomaterials Engineering, Nanomedicine, protein engineering, Chemical Biology, Microbiology, Structural Biology.

(ii) Be exposed to common problems that are prevalent in the domains of affordable healthcare/energy/water/environment.

(iii) Receive effective, hands-on laboratory training as a part of laboratory courses and short-term research projects that are designed to teach research methodology and common lab techniques.

(iv) Be introduced to Patents and other intellectual property documents, the rights that they grant, and necessary considerations while filing patents/technology that is protected by patents.

(v) Develop their research communication skills by participating in seminars, journal clubs; manuscript writing, and research grant writing workshops.

(vi) Receive training on building a work ethic by being a part of research groups working towards a common goal. Graduates will also appreciate the ethical and safety considerations while conducting biomedical research.

(vii) Be taught how to prioritize items on their schedule and how to budget time across the spectrum of activities including research and other necessary tasks.


Courses
The courses of B.Tech. (Bioengineering) Program are grouped into the following sets:
(a)  	Hands-on Exploration,
(b) 	Basics,
(c) 	Compulsory,
(d) 	Electives, and
(e) 	Life skills.
On the other hand, the courses of Ph.D. (Bioscience & Bioengineering) Program are electives. Detailed contents of the courses of the two Programs can be downloaded from here:
(1) 	Courses of B.Tech. (Bioengineering) Program   (Download file: 667 KB)
(2) 	Courses of M.Tech. (Bioscience & Bioengineering)   (Download file: 485 KB)
(3) 	Courses of Ph.D.   (Download file: 30 KB) 


Regulations 

1. INTRODUCTION
Academic programmes at Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur are designed to develop the
highest calibre human resource capable of understanding the new patterns of knowledge
creation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities,
social sciences and engineering. IIT Jodhpur aims to produce quality professionals who would be
able to address profound and wide-ranging societal challenges of the 21st century such as
energy, food, water, housing, mobility, and health. In addition to imparting scientific
knowledge, IIT Jodhpur endeavours to inculcate human qualities of courage, integrity, fairness,
humility and team effort among its graduates through curricular, co-curricular and
extra-curricular activities on campus.
The undergraduate academic programmes focus on developing a temper for the life long
process of learning, creative thinking and exploring. The postgraduate academic programmes
focus on developing a deep understanding of the subject of study coupled with creative
inquisitiveness and the ability to address and solve new problems with a free and objective
mind.
The academic programmes are based on three tenets of (1) semester system, (2) Credit
System and (3) Relative Grading. These academic programmes are administered by a duly
constituted Academic Committee (AC) through the office of Academics. The AC will be chaired
by Dean (Academics). In the absence of Dean (Academics), Associate Dean (Academics-
PG)/Associate Dean (Academics- UG) will discharge the responsibilities of Dean (Academics).
The Senate of the Institute has formulated a set of guidelines and rules to ensure a high
standard of performance as well as for smooth functioning of the academic programmes. Within
this broad set of guidelines, subject to the approval of Senate, different programmes can
include additional academic requirements as deemed necessary for that programme. These
academic programmes are continuously monitored by the Senate and make appropriate
modifications/ improvements as and when necessary.
2. ACADEMIC SESSION
The academic session normally runs from the end of July in one year to the middle of July in the
next year. The academic session is divided into three parts: two regular semesters and a
summer term as per the following timelines:
Semester I: From the fourth week of July to the last week of November
Semester II: From the last week of December to the last week of April
Summer Term: From the middle of May to the middle of July.
Excluding the days of the examinations, the total number of days of instruction in a semester is
at least 70.
2.1 Academic Calendar
The academic calendar gives the exact dates of all important events during the Academic
Session, such as orientation, registration, the commencement of classes, adding and dropping
of courses, submission of documents, examinations, submission of grades, project evaluation,
declaration of results, mid-semester recess, and vacation. This calendar is approved by the
Senate.
2
3. REGISTRATION
a. Registration: Students are required to register for prescribed credits as per the programme,
on the dates specified in the Academic Calendar. If the student does not register by the date of
registration, she/he can register by paying the fine and register before the date of late
registration.
b. Provisional Registration: A fresh student joining the Institute, who is awaiting the final
results of the qualifying examination, is allowed to register provisionally on submission of a
certificate from her/his last Institute stating that she/he has appeared in the final examination
of the qualifying degree. The student is required to submit documents of having passed the
qualifying examination by the last date given in the Academic Calendar for the registration to be
regularized.
c. Late Registration: If the student does not register by the date of late registration as
mentioned in the Academic Calendar, he/she will be deregistered. The appeal against
deregistration may be made to Chairman, Senate through Dean Academics. Chairman Senate
may permit the continuation of registration on payment of an appropriate fine.
d. Adding and Dropping of Courses: A student may add or drop course(s) with approval of
the Faculty advisor till the last date of registration.
e. Withdrawing from a Course: After the last date of add-drop, a student will have the
option of withdrawing from a course. The last date of course withdrawal will be typically within
four weeks from the beginning of the Semester as specified in the academic calendar. The
withdrawn course will be mentioned in the Student’s grade card with a letter grade ‘W’.
f. Cancellation of Semester Registration: Absence for a period of four or more weeks
during a semester shall result in automatic cancellation of the registration of a student from all
the courses in that semester.
g. Summer course registration: A department may offer summer courses to enable the
students to clear their backlog courses and/or regular credit courses. A course will run during
summer provided a faculty member(s) is available for running the course. The course is offered
on approval of the Dean.
4. TEACHING AND EVALUATION
4.1 Teaching
4.1.1 Medium of Instruction
The medium of instruction is English.
4.1.2 Course Structure
All courses have associated credits. Credits of a course are based on the number of contact
hours for lectures, tutorials, and practicals A student on successful completion of the course
with a passing grade will earn an equivalent number of credits. Based on the required academic
maturity level of students for attending a course, a course is assigned a level. A course can
consist of independent components which can be completed independently. These components
are called fractals. A course is identified by a unique number. Following tables define all
parameters related to course numbering scheme.

4.1.3 Approval of Courses
The Senate approves each course along with its weight in terms of credits. Only the approved
courses may be offered during any semester/summer term.
4.1.4 List of Courses
The list of courses to be offered in a Program is finalized before the beginning of the semester,
by the Department hosting that Program.
4.1.5 Categories of Courses
Courses offered can be from one of the following categories:
a) Regular course:
A regular course has 14 hours of classroom engagement per one credit. A regular course can be
under elective or core/compulsory categories.
5
Elective courses of 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, or 600, level will run if a minimum of 10 students
registers for the course. A 700 or 800 level elective course can run with a minimum of 5
registered students. A course not running as a regular course may be offered as a self-study
course as per the following section.
b) Self-study Course
A self-study course will be from the list of courses approved by Senate. The main features of a
self-study course are as follows:
● A student may be allowed to register for an elective course as a self-study course
provided that the course is not running in that semester as a regular course or a student
is not on campus during the course with prior approval of the competent authority.
● A student may also be permitted to register for a core or program compulsory course in
self-study mode provided he/she has failed in it earlier and the course is not being
offered as a regular course during that semester or a student is not on campus during
the course with prior approval of the competent authority.
● Students should apply for a self-study course with the appropriate recommendation of a
Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/IRC. The final sanction of a self-study course to a
student is made by the Dean (Academics).
● Formal classroom engagement may not be there for a self-study course but laboratory,
design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the
course.
● The Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the
award of letter grade at the end of the semester.
● A self-study course will appear with the approved course title on the transcript.
● Not exceeding 10% of the total graded credit can be opted as a self-study course.
c) Independent Study Course
Independent study enables a student to pursue course credit on an academic topic of interest
under the supervision of a faculty member. The term independent does not mean not involving
an Instructor but independent of regular class engagement. Self-disciplined and having a sense
of own direction and goals are fundamental requirements of an Independent Study course. A
student having CGPA more than or equal to 6.0 can opt for Independent Study courses with the
recommendation of Supervising Professor. The main features of an independent-study course
are as follows:
● A student may be permitted to register for a topic of interest as an independent-study
course not exceeding 3 credits in self-study mode at most once during the program.
Such independent study course will be counted toward open elective requirements of the
program and will appear with the title “Independent Study” on the transcript.
● Students should apply for an independent study course with the appropriate
recommendation of a Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/IRC. The final sanction of an
independent-study course to a student is made by the Dean (Academics).
● Normally, no formal lectures will be held for an Independent Study course but
laboratory, design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral
part of the course.
● The course will be arranged, planned and managed by a supervising professor. The
Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the award
of letter grade at the end of the semester.
4.1.6 Conduct of Courses
Each course is conducted by the Instructor with the assistance of the required number of tutors,
as needed. The Instructor is responsible for conducting the course, evaluating the performance
6
of students, awarding the grades at the end of the semester, and transmitting the grades as per
Subsection 5.2.
The student shall have access to his/her answer paper(s) of all the written examinations
conducted for a given course, which may be shown to him/her by the Instructor(s) concerned.
The instructor must keep all evaluation records in his custody at least for the next six months.
A course approved by the senate of IIT Jodhpur can be conducted through either (i) direct
contact (ii) synchronized remote contact (iii) guided study mode or combination of these. In
direct contact mode, coordinator or instructor will have a face to face physical interaction with
the students. Synchronized remote contact mode would require the faculty and/or the students
to be concurrently connected to the classroom interaction via electronic conferencing involving
both audio and video communication. However, there has to be direct interaction between
faculty and students for limited hours (typically 25%) of the stipulated contact hours. In guided
study mode, a faculty would guide a single or a group of students to take up the study of an
approved course via self-learning and discussion-oriented contact sessions. This mode can be
also adopted for enabling a student to take up study of a new course, not yet approved by the
Senate, under the supervision of a faculty. All formal evaluation component applicable to
courses being run through any one of the above-mentioned modes will be conducted under
direct physical supervision of a faculty. All laboratory component of a course requiring the use
of the specialized facility will be conducted through direct contact.
4.1.7 Teaching Assignments
The instructors and tutors for all courses to be offered during the semester are allocated by the
Head of the Department hosting the Program. When faculty members of other Departments are
also required to participate in teaching a particular course, the allocation shall be done in
consultation with the Head of that Department.
4.1.8 Auditing of Courses
A student may audit a course in addition to the prescribed academic load requirement with the
permission of Dean (Academics) on the recommendations of Instructor of the course being
audited and the Faculty Advisor. Under this arrangement, the course will be listed in the Grade
Card of the student.
4.1.9 Attendance Requirements
A student should have full attendance in each course. Unless the student takes leave of absence
for valid reasons, the student has to attend every lecture, tutorial, or lab session. The
attendance records must be made available to the student after every lecture. Even if the
student’s attendance falls below 75%, the student will be allowed to appear for the exams.
Students not meeting the attendance criterion of 75% will be required to score at least C grade
to pass a course. These students would be awarded F grade if their marks are lower than the
cut-off for C grade in a course.
4.2 Evaluation
The performance of students in a course is evaluated continuously, using their interaction in the
classroom, and performances in examinations, the laboratory work (if any), and term-papers
and projects.
The performance of students in a course is evaluated through examinations and on a continuous
basis. The Senate will decide from time to time on the system of tests and examinations in each
subject in each semester.
7
● Minor 1, Minor 2 and Major examinations are mandatory components of the evaluation of
a regular 14-week long lecture course. The minor examinations shall be of 60 minutes
duration and the major examination of 120 minutes. Fractal courses (less than 3 credits)
must have at least one examination.
● The total weightage of examination component (three examinations for a 14 week-long
course) shall be between 40% to 60% of the total weightage of evaluation measure.
● Evaluation policy has to be known from the first day of the class.
● The continuous evaluation may include but not limited to interaction in the classroom,
quizzes, assignments, tutorials, laboratory work, term papers and projects.
5. GRADING SYSTEM
5.1 Letter Grades
At the end of the semester, a student is awarded a relative letter grade in each course by the
Instructor offering the course considering the performance of the student during the semester
with respect to those of the other students registered in the course. It is proposed that ten
regular letter grades, namely A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D, E and F shall be awarded in each
course. Each letter grade is associated with a numerical equivalent on a 10-point scale shown in
Table 5.1. In addition, there are four special letter grades, namely, I, S, X and U, which stand
for Incomplete, Satisfactory, Thesis Continuation and Unsatisfactory, respectively. The faculty
member shall upload grade on the portal as per the stipulated time schedule.

A detailed description of some of the grades is given below:
S.N. Grades Description
1 A*
‘A*’ grade has the same grade point as ‘A’ grade. The grade ‘A*’ indicates
exceptional performance and is awarded only in the Course/(s) in which the
number of registered students is more than 50. It should not exceed 2 % of the
total strength of the particular theory or lab course. The grade ‘A*’ is not
awarded for projects /seminars.
8
2 E ‘E’ Grade will be awarded to a student who has scored marks less than the
cutoff marks for ‘D’ Grade and has met the attendance criterion of the institute.
Students who obtain an ‘E’ Grade will be eligible to appear in an additional
examination. If they perform satisfactorily, they become eligible for getting the
‘E’ grade converted to a ‘D’ Grade, otherwise, they will continue to have ‘E’
Grade. The student will have only one chance to appear for the additional
examination for an ‘E’ Grade. The additional examination will be conducted
within the first week of the next semester. The date of additional examination
of Institute core courses for undergraduate students centrally notified, while for
all other courses, the date would be announced by the respective course
coordinators. A student can appear for a maximum of three such additional
tests in a given semester. If a student cannot appear for the test due to any
reason(s), he/she will not get any additional chance. If a student with ‘E’ grade
in a course does not pass the course through the additional test, or obtains an
‘F’ grade in the course, he/she has to repeat the course if it is a core course. In
case the course is elective, the student may take the same course again or any
other course. ‘E’ and ‘F’ Grades are not counted in the calculation of the CGPA;
however, these are taken into account in the calculation of the SGPA.
3 I An ‘I’ grade is temporarily awarded to a student on his/her request to denote
incomplete performance in a course on approval of instructor. An ‘I’ grade is
awarded in case missing an evaluation component due to absence on medical
grounds or other special circumstances. Requests for ‘I’ grade should be made
at the earliest but not later than the last day of major tests. All evaluation
requirements for such students in the corresponding course(s) should be
completed before the end of the first week of the next semester. Upon
completion of all course requirements, the ‘I’ grade is converted to a regular
grade.
4 S This grade is awarded to a student with satisfactory performance in non-graded
and Audit courses. If the stipulated requirements are not fulfilled, the
unsatisfactory (U) grade is awarded. The grades obtained in an audit course
are not considered in the calculation of SGPA or CGPA.
5 X This grade is awarded to a student with satisfactory performance in thesis for
continuation
6 U This grade is awarded to a student with unsatisfactory performance in thesis,
audit or non-graded courses.
7 W This grade is awarded to a student who has opted to withdraw from a course.
Withdrawal from a course is permitted until the date specified in the Academics
Calendar.
5.2 Procedure for declaration of results
The following procedure would be followed for declaration of results and timeline would be as
per Academic Calendar.
1. Evaluation scheme to be displayed by instructors at the start of a semester:
2. Display of answer sheets and all scores by instructors.
3. Finalization of grades by instructors
4. Grade moderation by department/institute level committee for department/institute-wide
courses
9
5. Recommendation of grades by the Head of the Department after scrutiny of grades by a
moderation committee
6. Display of grades by Instructors
7. Grade correction, if any, within 48 hours of display of grades after approval of the head
of the department
8. Approval of Grade by the Dean (UG/PG)
9. Finalization of results by the Dean (UG/PG)
10. Approval of results by the Chairman Senate
11. Results once approved cannot be changed under any circumstance. In exceptional
cases, the student may appeal to the Chairman, Senate for reconsideration, with formal
justification.
5.3 Grade Point Averages
5.3.1 Semester Grade Point Average
The Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) is a weighted average of the grades earned by a
student in all the courses credited by her/him and reflects her/his academic performance in the
respective semester. If the grade points associated with the letter grades earned by a student
in N courses registered during a semester are G1, G2, … GN, and the corresponding credits C1,
C2, … CN, then the SGPA is given by the following formula:
The SGPA is calculated on the basis of grades obtained in all courses, except audit courses and
courses in which S/X grade is awarded, registered in a particular semester.
5.3.2 Cumulative Grade Point Average
The Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) indicates the overall academic performance of a
student in all the courses registered up to the latest completed semester. The CGPA is
computed similarly as the SGPA, considering all the courses in all semesters. The CGPA is
calculated on the basis of all pass grades (A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D), except audit courses and
courses in which S/X grade is awarded, obtained in all completed semesters.
The SGPA and CGPA calculation are based on credits earned/completed at IIT Jodhpur alone.
6. GRADE CARD AND TRANSCRIPT
A Grade Card shall be issued to each student at the end of each semester, and a Transcript at
the end of the Programme. IIT Jodhpur Grade Card and Transcript will only indicate the courses,
credits and grades completed at IIT Jodhpur and the total number of credits (without grades)
earned in other academic institutions in a particular semester, if applicable.
7. WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS IN SPECIAL CASES
The rules and regulations procedures and requirements stated in this manual, other than those
related to Admissions to the academic programmes, may be waived in special circumstances by
the AC on the recommendation of the Department with the approval of Chairman, Senate. All
such exceptions have to be reported to the Senate.
10
8. MAKE-UP EXAMINATIONS
A student who has missed minor(s) or the major examination due to genuine reasons like
illness etc. may be permitted to write a make-up examination for the missed components. The
student should make an application to the Dean (Academics) through the course instructor
within ten days from the date of the examination missed, explaining the reasons for their
absence. Applications received after this period need not be entertained. The permission to take
a make-up examination will be given under exceptional circumstances such as admission to a
hospital due to illness. A student needs to produce the necessary document subject to one of
the following categories:
● Students residing in the Hostels should produce a Medical Certificate issued by the
Medical Officer of the Institute that he/she was admitted to the Hospital during the
period of the missed quiz/exam.
● Students residing in the Hostels and taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are
required to obtain written permission from the Medical Officer of the Institute Hospital
before they proceed for such consultation.
● Students residing in the hostels but taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are
required to obtain an endorsement on the certificate of treatment by the Medical Officer
of the Institute Hospital.
● A student staying outside the Campus permanently / temporarily must produce a
medical certificate from the Registered Medical Practitioner and the same should be duly
endorsed by the parent/guardian.
A slot-wise make-up examination for major will be held during the makeup / supplementary
week as per Academic Calendar of the subsequent semester for those who are permitted to take
the make-up examination. A student who misses this make-up examination will not normally be
given another make-up examination. However, in exceptional cases of prolonged illness
resulting in the student missing a make-up examination, the Chairman of the Senate, in
consultation with the Dean of Academics may permit the student to appear for make-up
examination any day before the end of the first week of the next semester. Under no
circumstances, prorating can be done for the missed examinations or attendance.

A. REGULATIONS FOR UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMMES
13
9. UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMMES
IIT Jodhpur currently offers Bachelor of Technology (B. Tech.) programs, and capability linked
opportunities for undergraduate students to complete Minor/Interdisciplinary Area
Specializations or Department Area Specialization. A student can also opt for M.Tech.(dual
degree) in Departmental Area or Minor in Entrepreneurship leading to M.Tech. in
Entrepreneurship or Department Area Specialization in Engineering innovation.
10. UNDERGRADUATE ADMISSIONS
10.1 B.Tech. Programmes
10.1.1 General Admissions
Admissions to the B.Tech. Programmes are made once a year in July through the all-India level
Joint Entrance Examination (JEE) conducted by IITs. The procedures and other requirements for
admission are specified in the JEE Information Brochure brought out every year.
10.1.2 Cultural Exchange Programmes
Admissions are also offered to foreign nationals under the Cultural Exchange Fellowship
Program of the Government of India, administered by Indian Council of Cultural Relations
(ICCR), New Delhi. Persons interested in these programs are required to apply through the
Indian High Commission/Embassy in their respective countries.
10.1.3 Change/Enhancement of Program
A student already admitted to a B.Tech. programme may switch to another department through
branch change. A student can enhance his/her programme to a Minor/Interdisciplinary Area
Specialization leading to M. Tech. in Minor/Interdisciplinary Area, Major/Department Area
Specialization leading to M. Tech. in Department Area, Minor in Entrepreneurship, Minor in
Entrepreneurship leading to M. Tech. in Entrepreneurship and Department Area Specialization in
Engineering innovation (through Industrial Translation). The rules governing these changes are
given in Section 18 (branch change) and Section 11.2 (for all others).
10.2 Reservation Policy
The reservation policy of Government of India will be followed.
10.3 Student Exchange Program
Student Exchange Program provides for a one/two-semester visit by students between the two
academic institutions on a reciprocal basis. The visiting student must be a full-time student
enrolled in a degree program in their Home Institution. The exchange program is open to
full-time undergraduate and graduate students of each Home Institution. It will be executed as
per the pre-approved arrangement (including an MoU) between the institutions.
Selection of students under such program will be made by the DUGC after assessing the
preparedness of students to meet the requirements of the planned coursework/research at the
Host Institution and the relevance of the planned coursework/research to the enrolled degree
program. A visiting student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or
may use other academic facilities as per pre-approved arrangement (including an MoU).
Under exchange program, a student of IIT Jodhpur can register at another academic institution
in India or abroad with the expectation of credit transfer up to 20 credits per semester in lieu of
the course work or research work through a pre-approved arrangement including an MoU.
14
On return, the student may apply to DUGC for waiver of credits from her/his program
requirements which s/he thinks are equivalent to the courses successfully completed at the
visited academic institution as an exchange student. With the application, the student must
submit an official transcript of the grades obtained by her/him at the visited academic
institution as an exchange student and other documents/material that the concerned DUGC may
require for evaluation. The DUGC will determine, by whatever means it deems fit, the
equivalent credits requirements for which the student may be given a waiver in her/his
programme at IIT Jodhpur. DUGC will submit its recommendations to course equivalence
committee for its approval. Moreover,
● The credits/grades indicated in the grade sheet obtained from the academic institution in
which the student has completed the courses should be used by the student as part of
his/her transcripts.
● IIT Jodhpur transcripts will only indicate the courses, credits and grades completed at IIT
Jodhpur and the total number of credits (without grades) earned in other academic
institutions in a particular semester.
● The CGPA calculation based on credits earned/completed at IIT Jodhpur alone is to be
considered for award of prizes.
● The credits earned at the visited academic institutions will be taken into account for the
calculation of minimum required credits for the award of the degree.
10.4 Visiting Students
A visiting student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or
university in India or abroad, and who is officially permitted by that institute or university to
complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the visiting
student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other
academic facilities.
A person can be admitted as a visiting student on a duly sponsored application to the Dean
(Academics). A visiting student may be admitted for a maximum period of one year. A visiting
student will be required to pay all applicable fees depending upon the status, Program, and
nationality.
Students so admitted also will be governed by all rules, regulations, and discipline applicable to
regular students of the Institute.
10.5 Cancellation of Admission
Students admitted provisionally or otherwise to any Program shall submit copies of their mark
sheets, provisional certificates, etc. of the qualifying examination and other documents by the
last date specified for the purpose in the Academic Calendar. The Senate reserves the right to
cancel the admission of any student, who fails to submit the prescribed documents by the
specified date or to meet other stipulated requirement(s). Also, the Senate reserves the right to
cancel the admission at any later time, if it is found that the student had provided some false
information or suppressed relevant information while seeking admission.
10.6 Fulfillment of Admission Requirements
Admission to any undergraduate Program requires that the applicant be eligible, go through the
laid-down admission procedure, and pay the prescribed fees. The Senate should formally
approve all admissions to the Undergraduate Programmes.
15
11. CURRICULUM AND ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS
11.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for UG
Programmes
The total credits for a course are calculated by taking into account the number of lectures,
tutorial, and practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 11.1. Each credit is associated
with the number of contact hours and the expected number of self-learning hours (on an
average) to be spent by the student for each contact hour to meet academic demand of the
course.

11.2 Capability Linked Opportunities for Undergraduate Students
A B.Tech. student can opt for one of the following capabilities Linked Opportunities
1) Major/Department Specialization
2) Interdisciplinary Specialization
3) Minor
4) B.Tech. + M.Tech. Dual Degree
11.2.1 Eligibility Criteria for opting
(a) Major/Department Specialization, Minor/Interdisciplinary Specialization
A student should have earned a minimum 100 credits with the CGPA more than or equal to 6.0
at the end on 6th semester to opt for capability linked opportunity.
(b) B.Tech. + M.Tech. Dual Degree in the chosen specialization
Students who have already opted for Major/Department Specialization, Minor/Interdisciplinary
Specialization can opt for dual-degree Programme from the eighth semester provided they have
earned minimum 134 Credits with at least 6 CGPA at the end of the 7th semester.
11.2.2 Minimum Credit requirements
(a) Major/Department Specialization, Interdisciplinary Specialization and Minor
A student needs to complete a total of 20 Credits in the Major/Department Specialization or
Minor/Interdisciplinary Specialization area offered. 10 Credits out of 20 can be taken up as a
part of Open electives whereas the student is required to opt for an additional 10 credits in the
form of course overload. This will be indicated on the degree.
Registration for Additional Courses for Major/Department Specialization, Interdisciplinary
Specialization and Minor
16
Starting from the sixth semester, students having earned 80 credits with CGPA more than or
equal to 6.0 are permitted to take up to 4 extra Credits as part of their normal load, which
forms part of her/his additional learning component, every semester in addition to the
prescribed courses for their degree.
(b) B.Tech. + M.Tech. Dual Degree in the chosen specialization
A student needs to complete a total of 56 Credits in the Minor, Department, or Interdisciplinary
area offered. It will include credits earned for Major/Department or Minor/ Interdisciplinary area
Specialization excluding the project credits.

11.4 Maximum Duration of the Program
The maximum duration for the completion B.Tech. Programs shall be 14 registered semesters.
11.5 Academic Performance Requirements
The minimum requirements on credits earned for continuation in a B. Tech. Programme at the
end of the second registered semester is specified in the following table:
17
Table 11.3 Criteria for continuation at the end of the second registered semester
Description Minimum number of credits to be earned
GEN/OBC/GEN-EWS SC/ST/PD
Minimum for Continuation 18 14
If a student does not meet the criteria specified in Table 11.3, he/she may opt to restart the
programme or else their registration will be terminated. The restart will be permitted only once.
Dean (UG/PG) should propose a guideline for mentoring the student under probation. Dean of
Students should also involve in the process.
If a student chooses to restart after the first two registered semesters, then the credits earned
and semesters registered till that point will not be counted towards the graduation
requirements. The re-start will be indicated on the transcript.
11.5.1 Criteria to put a student on Academic Probation:
● From the third semester onward if a student fails to earn a minimum of 12 credits in
any registered semester, then he/she will be placed on academic probation.
● A student placed on probation shall be monitored, including mandatory attendance in
classes, special tutorials and mentoring. Mentoring would comprise structured guidance
under a senior student.
● If a student is on academic probation for two consecutive registered semesters, then
his/her registration will be terminated.
● If a student earns less than or equal to 15 credits in any registered semester a warning
shall be given to him/her and intimation be sent to the parents.
● The two semesters allowed for the academic probation should be counted towards the
total duration allowed for the program.
11.6 Assistantship for B.Tech. -M. Tech. Dual-degree Programmes
The students of dual-degree programmes will be considered for award of institute research/
teaching assistantship if they have earned 150 credits by the end of the eighth semester. Only
those students who have either qualified GATE or have a CGPA more than 8.0 will be eligible for
this assistantship. The assistantship will be provided for a maximum period of 14 months
beginning from the summer semester following the eighth semester, provided the student is
registered for M.Tech. Major Project in that semester. A student availing assistantship will be
required to provide 8 hours of assistance per week besides his/ her normal academic work. For
continuation of assistantship, a student will need to secure SGPA of 6.5.
A student receiving assistantship will be eligible for a total of 30 days leave during the
14-month period. He/she will not be entitled to mid-semester breaks, winter and summer
vacations.
12. UG REGISTRATION
12.1 Summer Courses
Students can register for courses during summer up to a maximum of Eight Credits on payment
of registration fee at prescribed rates. The summer term is not a regular semester and only
academically deficient students (who have low CGPA and/or fewer credits than advised by the
curriculum till that point in the programme), Major students, Minor students, and such students
18
who are short of maximum Eight Credits to complete all graduation requirements may register
during this period.
For core courses, only students with failed backlog may be considered for summer registration.
In case any vacancies are left in the courses being offered during the summer term once the
requirements of the above categories of students are fulfilled, other students may register for
these courses to fulfil some of their graduation requirements in advance.
The total number of contact hours for the courses remains the same as that during the regular
semesters, and therefore the courses run at an accelerated pace. The evaluation and grading
patterns also remain the same as during the regular semesters.
12.2 Limits on Registration
● An undergraduate student should register for a minimum of 12 credits in a semester.
● The maximum number of credits permitted for a UG student in a semester is 25.
● An undergraduate student may be permitted to register for a maximum of four credits
per semester for independent-study or self-study course
12.3 Exceptions to Regular Rules regarding Academic Load
Under-load: Students who are identified as academically deficient (on academic probation)
may register for a maximum of 16 credits.
Over-load: Overloading may be allowed only for students who are not on academic probation
and satisfy one of the following criteria:
● Students are allowed to overload only when they need 70 or less additional credits to
complete all the requirements of their programme.
● Beyond the second semester, any student with a CGPA of 7.5 or higher may be allowed
to overload.
12.4 Change of Registration from B. Tech. Programme to B.Tech.- M.
Tech. dual degree Programme
A B.Tech. student having opted for major/minor specialization with CGPA 6 or more at the end
of the seventh semester and fulfilling requirements mentioned earlier may be allowed to switch
to B.Tech.- M. Tech. dual degree program in the chosen specialization at the beginning of the
eighth semester. The M.Tech degree can be any one of the approved programmes of the
institute. All requirements of M.Tech. Degree will be applicable to all such students. All such
changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate.
13. EVALUATION OF SPECIAL UG ONLY COURSES
13.1 B.Tech. Project Evaluation
● DUGC will appoint a committee for B.Tech. Project evaluation. The committee will ensure
that Award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy.
● The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project.
● DUGC will form the evaluation criterion and declare it to students.
19
13.2 Composition of Department Undergraduate Committee (DUGC)
● The DUGC will be constituted of all UG Faculty Advisors and Head of Department. The
Head of Department will be the chairperson and one of the faculty advisors would be the
convenor.
13.2 Engineering Innovation
● At the completion of an Engineering Innovation Project the student will submit a report
which will be evaluated by duly appointed examiner(s) by DUGC.
● The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project/
Entrepreneurship and a letter grade is awarded.
● Evaluation policy has to be declared by the concerned department from the first day of
the class.
13.3 Design Project Evaluation
● At the completion of a project, the student will submit a project report which will be
evaluated by duly appointed examiner(s) by DUGC.
● The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the project
and S or U grade is awarded.
● Evaluation policy has to be declared by the concerned department from the first day of
the class.
13.4 Conduct and Evaluation of B.Tech. -M. Tech Dual Degree Project
● Allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the
students and supervisor(s).
● The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the eighth
semester.
● Coordinator, M. Tech. Program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular
supervisor(s).
● The evaluation criterion would be the same as Section 25.
13.5 Entrepreneurship Project
● At the completion of Entrepreneurship, the student will submit a report which will be
evaluated by duly appointed examiner(s) by Dean (Academics-UG)/Associate Dean
(Academics-UG).
● The evaluation will be based on the report and a viva-voce examination on the
Entrepreneurship and a letter grade is awarded.
14. TERMINATION
14.1 Termination from B.Tech. Program
A student may be terminated from the B.Tech. Programme by AC, if the student
(a) Is absent without authorized leave of absence for eight weeks or more in a semester; OR
(b) Fails to report and register by the last date of registration without a bonafide reason; OR
(c) Violates the code of conduct, involves in ragging, etc. as confirmed by a Committee
constituted for the purpose; OR
(d) Does not earn the prescribed minimum number of credits within the maximum duration of
the program; OR
(e) Is on academic probation for two consecutive semesters.
20
14.2 Appeal against Termination
A student, who is terminated from the B.Tech. Program can appeal to the Chairman, Senate, for
reconsideration. While making such an appeal, the student is expected to give reasons for poor
academic performance and/or why the termination should be reconsidered. The Senate shall
take a final decision after considering all the available inputs. But, the Senate will not entertain
any further appeal for review, unless substantial additional information is brought to its notice.
15. LEAVE RULES
Application for leave of absence should be addressed to the Convener DUGC, and submitted
with a medical certificate, if applicable. Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior
approval of the DUGC.
15.1 Mid-Semester Recess and Vacation
Undergraduate students are entitled to avail of mid-semester recess and vacation as specified in
the Academic Calendar.
15.2 Short Leave
A student may be granted leave of absence during the semester for a maximum of 10 days on
medical grounds, and for 5 days for any other valid reason.
15.3 Semester Withdrawal
It may be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. Absence for a period
of four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester.
DUGC can approve and intimate Office of Academics regarding the leave of the student for
records. In case, the leave extends beyond a semester, it can only be approved through the
Academic Committee. Semester withdrawal on the medical ground will not be counted towards
the maximum permissible duration of the programme for the student.
15.4 Academic Leave
To help students broaden their horizons and gain course/work experience, she/he may be
permitted to proceed to other academic institutes/ Industry/ R&D organization in India or
abroad. Academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as
(a) Fieldwork
(b) Experimental work/training using specialized facility not available at IITJ
(c) Entrepreneurship initiative
(d) Engineering innovation
(e) Exchange program – as part of an exchange program with an academic institution in
India or abroad
(f) Internship work
All such requests must be evaluated and approved by DUGC before the leave is granted.
A student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one summer term and two
semesters on academic leave.
A student during academic leave can earn a maximum of 20 credits per semester as certified by
the DUGC and approved by the Course Equivalence Committee.
16. BRANCH CHANGE
(a) An undergraduate student is eligible to apply for branch change at the end of the second
semester only, provided the student satisfies the following criteria:
21
1. Secured a CGPA, at the end of the second semester, of:
i. Greater than or equal to 7.0 for SC/ST and PD applicants
ii. Greater than or equal to 8.0 for other applicants
2. Completed all prescribed course credits for the first two semesters (including the
non-graded courses).
3. No backlog at the end of the second semester.
(b) The student should have no disciplinary action against him/her.
(c) Change of the branch will be permitted strictly in the order of merit as determined by
CGPA at the end of the second semester. Each available seat may be occupied by
students of any category. For students of SC/ST/PD category, concession in eligibility
criteria is given as per rule (a).
(d) In case more than one student applying for branch change have the same CGPA, the tie
shall be resolved on the basis of JEE ranks of such applicants.
(e) In making a change of branch, the strength of a branch should not fall below 85% of
the sanctioned strength and should not go above 115% of the sanctioned strength.
(f) The conditions mentioned in item (a) above will not be insisted upon for change to a
branch in which a vacancy exists with reference to the sanctioned strengths, and the
concerned student was eligible as per JEE Rank for admission to that branch at the time
of entry to IIT Jodhpur.
(g) Notwithstanding any of the conditions listed above, a student with CGPA of 9 or more at
the end of the second semester will be allowed to move to a branch of his/her choice.
17. REQUIREMENTS FOR GRADUATION
A student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation if she/he has met the
conditions laid down in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4.

17.2 Academic
The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned
the minimum credits as per Table 11.2 in Section 11.3 for all degrees.
17.3 Payment of Fees and Dues
The degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as
deemed necessary by Dean (Academics).
17.4 No case of Disciplinary Action
The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if there is
any case of indiscipline pending against her/him.
22
17.5 Completion of engagement in NCC, NSS or NSO
The student should have completed extra-curricular activity like performing arts, sports,
National Cadet Corps, National Service Schemes, and National Sports Organisation for a period
of at least two semesters during their B.Tech. Program.
17.6 Award of Degrees
17.6.1 Provisional Certificate
A student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, can
be provided a provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of
Chairman, Senate. Certificate will have mention of major, minor, Department or
Interdisciplinary Specialization wherever applicable.
17.6.2 Degree Certificate
A student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, is
recommended by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate
degree in the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its
approval. The certificate will have mention of major, minor, Department or Interdisciplinary
Specialization wherever applicable.
18. AMENDMENTS
Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the
right to modify/amend without notice, the curricula, procedures, requirements, and rules
pertaining to its B.Tech. Programs.
23
B. REGULATIONS FOR POSTGRADUATE PROGRAMMES
24
19. POSTGRADUATE PROGRAMMES
The Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur currently offers the following Postgraduate
programmes.
1. Master of Science (M.Sc.)
2. Dual degree: M.Sc.-M.Tech.
3. Master of Technology (M.Tech.)
4. Dual degree: M.Tech.-PhD.
5. Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.)
20. POSTGRADUATE ADMISSIONS
The process of admission for all the programs offered by the Institute normally is underway
during April-May for Semester 1 and during November-December for Semester 2. In addition,
the department may process applications for admissions to PhD programs on a continuous basis
and admit students as per the existing procedure.
20.1 Categories of Admission
A candidate can be admitted in any one of the following categories
i. Full-time regular
ii. Full-time sponsored
iii. Part-time
iv. External
v. Executive
However, all categories are not applicable for all PG Programs. Further, programmes can be
offered in a combination of these modes (like fully sponsored part-time program).
i) Full-time Regular
In campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. A student
supported by a project of the institute will be considered a full-time regular student.
ii) Full-time Sponsored
In campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. The candidate
is sponsored either by his/her employer or by self. A self-sponsored candidate must have two
years of relevant industrial/R&D/academic experience.
iii) Part-time
A part-time student is a working professional who, while employed, attend regular classes as
per the schedule of the Institute. The student must be employed in the neighbourhood of IIT
Jodhpur. The student must produce a NOC from the employer for pursuing the programme at
IIT Jodhpur. The student can register only for a limited number of credits as compared to a
full-time regular student.
iv) External
A student working in an industry/R&D establishment/academic institution which is equipped
with the necessary research and library facilities. The employer must relieve the student to stay
in the campus to complete the minimum residency requirements.
v) Executive (only for M. Tech.)
A professional who can carry out/complete the programme requirement in
1. An accelerated fashion (minimum in 12 months), OR
2. Accumulates credits as per convenience and petitions a degree in a maximum of 6 years.
25
3. The part-time or full-time mode by attending courses offered in synchronized remote
contact mode and limited direct interaction
20.2 Eligibility for Admission
(a) The eligibility conditions given below are the absolute minimum. Departments may
prescribe any requirements over and above, subject to the approval of the Senate.
(b) The number of admissions that can be made to any program shall be decided by the
Senate from time to time.
(c) Reservation of seats for various reserved categories shall be prescribed by the Board of
Governors.
20.2.1 Admission to M. Sc. Program (Regular)
The admission to the M.Sc. Programs offered by the Institute will be through any one of the
following two avenues.
(a) The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by
IITs.
(b) The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3- or 4-year
program) may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT
Jodhpur.
The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55%
for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA
of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding
proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC
category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first-class as specified by the university/institute.
20.2.2 Admission to M Sc – M Tech Dual Degree Program (Regular)
The admission to the M. Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree Programs offered by the Institute will be
through any one of the following two avenues.
(a) The applicants qualified through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by
IITs.
(b) The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3- or 4-year
program) may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT
Jodhpur.
The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55%
for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA
of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding
proportional requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC
category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a first-class as specified by the university/institute.
20.2.3 Admission to M Tech Program (Regular)
(a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or
a master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Sciences, Agricultural Sciences
and Veterinary Sciences or in a related field
(b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as
specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for
SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when
the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST)
on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute.
(c) The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD
circular or have qualified an equivalent National Examination or have qualified in the
written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
26
20.2.4 Admission to MTech Program (Executive/Part-time/ External/Sponsored)
(a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4-year program) or
a master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and
Veterinary Science or in a related field.
(b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as
specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for
SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when
the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST)
on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute.
(c) The applicant must have a minimum of two years of work experience (after qualifying
degree) in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to
the program. However, the credit accumulation for the program may start immediately
after the qualifying degree. Petitioning for the degree can happen only 1 year after
registration.
(d) The applicant must qualify the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
20.2.5 Admission to M .Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program (Regular)
(a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4-year program) or
a master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and
Veterinary Science or in a related field
(b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as
specified by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for
SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when
the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4 for SC/ST)
on a scale of 8) or a first-class as specified by the university/institute.
(c) The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD
circular or have qualified an equivalent National Examination or have qualified in the
written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
20.2.6 Admission to Ph.D. Program (Regular)
(a) Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other
academic program in India or abroad, and shall not be a full-time or part-time employee
of any organization in India or abroad.
(b) The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural
science, science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at
least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),
OR
(c) The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with
MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or
CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,
OR
(d) The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four-year duration in
engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary
science or equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for
GEN/OBC (65% for SC/ST).
20.2.7 Admission under any special scheme like Quality Improvement Programme
(QIP), Defence Personnel
The procedures and criteria for admission of these candidates can be decided with the approval
of Chairman, Senate.
27
20.2.8. Admission of Indian Nationals Residing Abroad (INRA) and Foreign Nationals
INRA candidates must have been residing abroad continuously for at least one year at the time
of applying for admission.
The applications of INRA and foreign nationals may be processed by the departments as and
when they are received or according to any schedule convenient to the department. The
applications should be scrutinized to make sure that, both in terms of qualifications and
attainment they are comparable with the candidates admitted in the general category.
Department will conduct VC based interview for ascertaining suitability of the candidate.
The applications of foreign nationals, who are sponsored by the Indian Council of Cultural
Relations (ICCR) will be scrutinized by the department concerned to assess their suitability for
admission to the programme. The department's recommendation will be sent to the
Chairperson, Senate through the Chairperson, AC.
20.2.9 Admission to Ph.D (sponsored/external/part-time)
(a) Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other
academic program in India or abroad.
(b) The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural
science, science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at
least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),
OR
(c) The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with
MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or
CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,
OR
(d) The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four-year duration in
engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary
science or equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for
GEN/OBC (65% for SC/ST).
(e) The applicant must have a minimum of two years of work experience (after qualifying
degree) in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to
the program.
(f) The applicant must qualify the written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
20.3 Admission of Non-Degree Students
A non-degree student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or
university in India or abroad, and who is officially sponsored by that institute or university to
complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the
non-degree student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use
other academic facilities.
Any candidate can be admitted as a casual student for specific courses provided the candidate
satisfies the minimum eligibility criteria specified in Section 20.2. The application must be
routed through the office of Dean R&D.
Students so admitted will be governed by all rules, regulations and discipline of the Institute.
20.4 Reservation Policy
The reservation policy of Government of India will be followed.
28
21 PG REGISTRATION
21.1 Limits on Registration
Maximum and minimum number of credits a student can register in different programs:
● M.Sc.: An M.Sc. student can register for a maximum of 24 credits and a minimum of 10
credits in a semester.
● M.Tech.: An M.Tech. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per
Table 21.1.

● M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree/Direct Ph.D. (Joining after B.Tech.) - The maximum and
minimum credits that an M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree student can register are equivalent
to that of an M.Tech. (Regular/External/Part-time) student.
● Ph.D.: A Ph.D. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table
21.2.

21.1.1 Registration Kept Alive (RKA)
A student admitted to an M.Tech program who has at least completed minimum credit
requirement of the first semester, can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any
professional activity, by opting for RKA in subsequent semesters. The candidate must indicate
his intent of RKA before the last date of late registration through DRC to Dean(academic). The
candidate has to pay appropriate registration fees for RKA status. A student can maintain RKA
status for a maximum of 6 semesters.
29
21.2 Change of Registration from M.Tech. Programme to M.Tech.-Ph.D.
dual degree Programme
A regular student registered for the M.Tech. programme having CGPA 8 or more at the end of
the second semester may be allowed to switch to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program till the
end of the third semester. As a special case, a student can switch to a dual degree in the fourth
semester with the approval of DRC, provided his/her CGPA is 8 or more, who will then be
required to complete his/her candidacy requirements by the end of the fifth semester.
All conditions of M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program will be applicable to all such students. All
such changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate.
21.3 Change of Registration from Part-Time M.Tech. to Part-Time Ph.D.
Program
A part-time M.Tech. student having CGPA 8 or more after completion of at least 24 credits may
be allowed to change his/her registration to the Ph.D. program. The credits earned will be
counted towards his/her Ph.D. course work requirements.
21.4 Change of Registration from Full-Time to Part-Time/External Ph.D.
Programme
A student admitted to a full-time Ph.D. programme may be permitted to change to a part-time
Ph.D. programme. A student requesting such a conversion must:
i) have successfully completed his/her candidacy requirement;
ii) get the request endorsed by the supervisor(s) and the DRC;
iii) produce a "No Objection" Certificate from his/her employer for carrying out the research
work.
21.5 Maximum Duration of a Program
● M.Sc. - 8 registered semester
● M.Tech. (Regular and Part-time/External/Executive) - 12 registered semesters
which may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive (RKA) after
completion of the first semester. Tuition fee post RKA will be same as that of sponsored
candidates.
● Ph.D. and M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree (Regular and Part-time/External) - 14
registered semesters which may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive
(RKA) after completion of the two semesters. Tuition fee post RKA will be same as that
of sponsored candidates.
● Students may request for RKA to Dean (Academics) through DRC.
21.5 Course Registration
Students will be eligible to register for courses as per the criterion specified in Section 21.1 and
Table 4.4.
The DRC/ IRC must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course
during her/his Masters or Bachelors program.
30
22 ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS
22.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for PG
Programmes
The total credits for a course are calculated by taking into account the number of lectures,
tutorial, and practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 22.1 and 22.2 for M.Sc. and
M.Tech. Ph.D. programmes respectively. Each credit is associated with the number of contact
hours and the expected number of self-learning hours (on an average) to be spent by the
student for each contact hour to meet academic demand of the course.

22.2 Course categories for Masters’ programmes
1) Compulsory Course (MC)
2) Programme Elective (ME)
3) Open Elective (MO)
4) Project works (MP)
5) Non-graded (NG)

23. LEAVE RULES
Application for leave of absence should be addressed to the Convener DRC, and submitted with
a medical certificate, if applicable. Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval
of the DRC.
23.1 Leave
A maximum of 30 days in an academic year (including leave on medical grounds + mid
semester break). The student must apply for leave in advance even during the summer/winter
term or mid-semester break.
A PhD student cannot avail leave for more than 15 days at a stretch
An M.Tech./M.Sc. student cannot avail leave for more than 10 days at a stretch
The leave beyond 30 days in an Academic Year may be granted in exceptional cases by DRC
without assistantship during that period.
23.2 Other Leaves
Maternity leave for Ph.D. students is sanctioned as per the directives of MHRD. It will not be
counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the programme.
Any other leave may also be permissible as per the guidelines of MHRD.
34
23.3 Semester Withdrawal
May be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. Absence for a period of
four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester.
In all such cases, the fellowship will be stopped with immediate effect and it will be continued
for only after the student rejoins the institute. DRC can approve and intimate Office of
Academics regarding the leave of the student for records. In case, the leave extends beyond a
semester, it can only be approved through the Academic Committee. Semester withdrawal on
the medical ground will not be counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the
programme for the student.
23.4 Academic Leave
Academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as
1. Fieldwork
2. Library work- because of a specialized collection at a particular library
3. Experimental work/training using specialized facility not available at IITJ
4. Attending conferences/workshops/summer/winter schools/symposium
5. Collaborative work as part of joint M.Tech./Ph.D. supervision
6. Collaborative work for a specific problem related to his ongoing Ph.D programme as
indicated in his research proposal
7. Exchange program – as part of an exchange program with a sister institution in India or
abroad
All such requests must be evaluated and approved by SRC/DRC/IRC before the leave is granted.
SRC/DRC/IRC must also make recommendations regarding continuation of fellowship during
academic leave.
● A student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one year on academic leave.
● A student during academic leave can earn a maximum of 12 credits per semester as
certified by SRC and approved by DRC.
24. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
Financial assistantship/scholarship will be provided to the eligible students admitted
under regular full-time program. The eligibility criteria are as per the following:
24.1 M.Sc. Program
Merit-cum-Means fellowship as per Institute norms.
24.2 M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual-Degree Program
A student having completed minimum credit requirements of an M.Sc. program at the end of
the second year with
(a) CGPA>=8
OR
(b) have qualified GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund.
24.3 M.Tech. Program
A regular M.Tech. student with GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund. A
student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.
35
24.4 Executive M Tech Program
Students admitted in this category will not be provided any financial assistance from the
Institute.
24.5 M.Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program
Rules and regulations governing financial assistance for dual degree students will be at par with
regular Ph.D. students.
24.6 Ph.D. Program
A regular Ph.D. student admitted to the Institute will be eligible for financial assistance as per
the norms of IIT Jodhpur.
(a) A candidate having B.Tech./B.S. (four-year program)/Master's degree with
GATE/NET(JRF)/NBHM (or equivalent) can have financial assistance as per MHRD
norms/or equivalent applicable for non-science departments.
(b) The requirement of GATE is exempted for an applicant with M.Tech or equivalent
post-bachelor's degree
(c) A student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.
A Ph.D. student would be eligible for enhancement in the scholarship after two years provided
the student has met qualifier requirement. The enhanced fellowship will commence from the
date of completion of both the conditions. No arrears will be provided due to delay in completing
the qualifier requirement.
The Teaching/Research Assistantship of a Ph.D. student shall stop from the day of submission of
the Thesis.
25. RULES AND REGULATION FOR CONDUCT AND
EVALUATION OF M. TECH./M.SC. PROJECT
● Allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the
students and supervisor(s).
● The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the first
semester.
● Coordinator, M. Tech. Program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular
supervisor(s).
● Each semester a letter grade will be awarded after examination by a committee
consisting of DRC, supervisor(s) and two members conversant with the field of research
with at least one member external to the department (maybe outside the Institute also).
DRC will appoint examiners in consultation with the supervisor. The same committee
may examine more than one thesis. External member can be on VC. DRC will ensure
that Award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy.
● A regular full-time student must register for M.Tech Project Part-1 in the summer
semester following 2nd semester. He must obtain a satisfactory grade to continue M.Tech
project part-1 in the next semester. His performance in the summer semester will be
evaluated by his supervisor.
36
26 RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR PH. D. /M. TECH.-PH. D.
DUAL DEGREE PROGRAM
26.1 Thesis Supervisor(s)
26.1.1 Selection of Ph.D. Candidates
The selection should be based on merit and capability of the candidate to conduct research.
There should at least be a faculty member available or likely to join in the areas of interest of
the candidate at the time of selection.
26.1.2 Appointment of Thesis Supervisor(s)
● Ph. D. students shall be admitted in the department and no supervisor shall be
assigned at the time of selection.
● Allotment of students to supervisor(s) will be made based on the preferences of the
students and supervisor(s).
● For both Ph. D. and M. Tech. - Ph. D. Dual degree supervisor(s) and area identification
must be completed by the end of the first semester
● The Convener, DRC (Department Research Committee)/Coordinator (Interdisciplinary
Research Program) would advise until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor(s).
● There shall not be more than two supervisors, in general, for a student. Additional
supervisor can be allowed with the approval of Chairman, Senate.
● A supervisor from outside the institute, before the qualifier, may be appointed on the
request of student/supervisor(s) with the recommendation of the DRC/IRC and the Dean
(Academics) and approval of the Chairman, Senate.
● The external supervisor will be requested to sign Intellectual Property Right (IPR) and
Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) documents as a part of acceptance. From the financial
point of view the Institute will have no obligation to the external supervisor.
26.1.3 Caretaker Supervisor/Additional supervisor
● Whenever the supervisor proceeds on short leave for a period up to one year, the
DRC/IRC (Interdisciplinary Research Committee) shall appoint a caretaker supervisor in
consultation with the supervisor and the student to take care of the administrative
requirements.
● Whenever the supervisor proceeds on long leave for a period more than a year, then an
additional supervisor needs to be appointed on the suggestion of the supervisor.
● The supervisor going on lien or sabbatical may continue supervising students and the
supervisor can opt for either an additional supervisor or a caretaker supervisor.
● The supervisor on his/her retirement or on resignation may continue as a supervisor and
will have to opt for an additional supervisor provided the student has cleared qualifier
before the supervisor’s retirement/resignation.
26.1.4 Composition of Departmental Research Committee (DRC)
The DRC will consist of coordinators of M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree and Ph.D. programs
of the department, head of the Department and Senior Professor/Associate Professor proposed
by the Head. The DRC will be Chaired by Professor/Associate Professor nominated by Head of
the Department. The Chairman of the DRC will be a member of the Academic Committee. The
DRC has to be approved by Dean (Academics). Ph.D. program coordinator will be the convenor
of DRC and will be proposed by the head. The tenure for the DRC will be 2 years.
37
26.1.5 Composition of Interdisciplinary Research Committee (IRC)
The IRC will consist of all coordinators of IDRPs and Senior Professor/Associate Professor as the
chairman of the IRC will be nominated by Dean (Academics). The chairman of IRC will be a
member of AC. One of the IDRP co-ordinators would be convenor of the committee. The tenure
for the IRC will be 2 years. The IRC will be approved by the Dean (Academics).
26.2 Change of Research Supervisor
Change of supervisor (s), under exceptional circumstances, shall be permitted by Dean
(Academics) on the recommendation of the DRC/IRC after obtaining the consent of (i) the
student (ii) the present supervisor (s) and (iii) the proposed supervisor(s). If required,
realignment of student’s research program will happen under the supervision of the DRC/IRC.
26.3 Student Research Committee (SRC)
26.3.1 Composition of SRC
● The SRC will normally consist of supervisor(s) and three other faculty members
conversant with the field of research with at least one member external to the
department (maybe outside the Institute also).
● A Student Research Committee (SRC) for the candidate shall be proposed by the
supervisor(s), recommended by the DRC/IRC and approved by Dean (Academics).
● The SRC shall have one member identified as Chairman for administrative functions and
the supervisor(s) will act as convener. Chairman, SRC is to be appointed by Dean
(Academics).
● The appointment of SRC should be completed by the end of the first semester.
● Any subsequent changes in the composition of SRC shall be communicated through the
DRC/IRC to Dean (Academics) for record.
● Chairman and supervisor(s) shall be the internal examiners for the evaluation of the
thesis.
● The SRC is expected to monitor the progress of the candidate until the
completion of the program.
26.4 Annual Progress Monitoring Meeting (APM)
The academic progress of all registered Ph.D. students will be reviewed once in a year by the
SRC and peers in the institute. The review will be based upon (i) Annual Progress Report and (ii)
A Poster Presentation open to all. SRC will award a Satisfactory/Non-Satisfactory grade based
upon (i) and (ii). Two consecutive Non-satisfactory grades will lead to termination of
registration.
For implementational convenience, academic calendar must indicate two days in a year for
conducting annual progress evaluation of research scholars. Following the groupings of students
and scheduling guidelines are suggested
1. For students joining in 1st semester of AY: During 1st July to 30th September of the
year.
2. For students joining in 2nd semester of AY: During 1st December to 28th February of the
year.
The first APM will be conducted after the successful completion of qualifier requirements.
Each semester “Satisfactory” progress or “Unsatisfactory” progress will be reported by the
supervisor(s) through the SRC for record.
Any situation in exception to the above will be processed by the academic committee and
approved by Dean (academics)
38
26.5 Qualifier requirements of Ph.D. Student
The following four components together will constitute qualifier (candidacy) requirements for a
Ph. D. student and for a Ph. D. candidate to be eligible for the enhanced SRF fellowship.
1. Completed course requirements with the minimum CGPA specified in Section 22.8.1
2. Cleared comprehensive examination
3. Successful presentation on state of the art of the chosen field of research
4. Successful presentation and defense of Research proposal
The Ph. D. students are normally expected to complete successfully the Qualifier requirements
before the beginning of the fifth semester of his/her registration in the Ph. D. program and
in any case not later than the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in
the Ph. D. program. Part-time candidates will need to complete the qualifier requirement before
the beginning of the seventh semester.
26.5.1 Comprehensive Examination of Ph. D. /M.Tech-Ph.D Student
● The comprehensive examination must be designed to test the general capability of the
student and the breadth of his/her knowledge in the discipline and areas related to the
field of research.
● The Comprehensive Examination shall be conducted by a Comprehensive Examination
Committee of the Department/IDRP.
● The Comprehensive Examination will consist of a written test with three papers.
● Departments will offer at least 5 Papers for conducting a comprehensive examination.
Each paper will have broad coverage of one essential sub-area of the department. The
course content of these papers will be approved by the academic committee and the
Senate. The syllabus of papers for the comprehensive examination will not be the same
as courses offered by the department; it must be designed to test the breadth of the
knowledge in that area.
● The SRC will specify a set three papers as a comprehensive requirement for a particular
student. These three papers may be selected from across the departments.
● The comprehensive examination requirements shall be intimated to the Ph.D. student
within two weeks of SRC formation.
● All comprehensive examinations will be scheduled on two fixed days in a year. It can
coincide with the annual progress evaluation day of doctoral candidates. Students may
decide to appear for three papers on the same day or on different days.
● A student can appear in the comprehensive examination before he/she has completed
the course requirements and satisfied the minimum specified CGPA requirement.
● If the performance of the Ph.D. student in a comprehensive examination paper in the
first attempt is not satisfactory, he/she will be given one more opportunity to appear
within six months of the first attempt.
● For clearing of the comprehensive examination, a student must perform satisfactorily in
all papers.
Comprehensive Examination to be completed by the students:
● Ph.D. : within 3 semesters
● Direct Ph.D. and MTech - PhD Dual Degree: within 5 semesters
26.5.2 State of Art Seminar (SOTA)
Every Ph.D. student is required to give a general seminar in the Department covering the State
of Art of the area of research. The presentation must also include patent landscaping of the
39
area. The presentation will be evaluated by the SRC. A candidate must have a satisfactory
grade in SOTA awarded by SRC for becoming eligible to present his research proposal.
26.5.3 Research Proposal
Research proposal (report + presentation) will be evaluated by SRC after successful completion
of SOTA. The research proposal must include representative research work equivalent to
research work worth 16 credits. SRC will allocate a letter grade based on the performance of the
candidate.
26.6. Candidacy for the Ph.D. Degree
A student enrolled in the Ph.D. program is formally admitted to the candidacy for the Ph.D.
degree after he/she has completed the qualifier requirements for the degree. Only such
students who are admitted to the candidacy will be allowed to submit Ph.D. thesis.
26.7 Relaxation in M.Tech. -Ph.D. dual degree program
● M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree students who have successfully completed all qualifier
requirements, under exceptional conditions, as approved by SRC after 3 years can also
convert into part-time/external Ph.D. student and exit with M.Tech degree if all
conditions for part-time/external conversion are satisfied.
● The renewal of their registration for every semester however, will be considered only if
SRC finds their progress to be satisfactory and recommends the continuance of
registration.
26.8 Cancellation of Registration
● The registration of a student whose progress is not found to be satisfactory by the SRC
or who has not enrolled will be liable for cancellation.
● The registration of a student who has not submitted his/her thesis before the end of the
maximum permissible period specified in Section 21.5 will be liable for cancellation.
26.9 Synopsis
● Synopsis will consist of an open seminar and a comprehensive internal closed-door
assessment of the research work, through a pre-synopsis report, by SRC.
● The student can submit the synopsis only if the SRC is satisfied with the quality and
quantity of the work for submission as a Ph.D. thesis.
● Publications arising out of the thesis are to be submitted along with the pre-synopsis
report.
● Students should submit the synopsis and thesis within six months of the open seminar
date. If required, an extension of three months may be permitted by Dean (Academics)
on the recommendation of SRC.
● If the synopsis and thesis are not submitted in the specified period, the student will be
asked to present the synopsis again.
● On satisfactory completion of the prescribed courses with minimum CGPA specified in
4.6.1, the comprehensive examination, the SOTA, the research work and the synopsis,
the student shall submit the requisite copies of the synopsis of his/her research work in
the required format through the supervisor(s) and HoD to the Academic Section for
consideration of the SRC.
40
● The student should have at least one paper either published or accepted for publication
in a refereed journal/refereed conference (SRC members are required to certify the
quality of journals/conference).
26.10 Thesis submission and Evaluation
The supervisor(s) shall propose a list of 10 examiners consisting of at least four Faculty
Members from abroad and 4 Faculty Members from India, who have the expertise in the area in
which the student undertook research. For selecting an examiner, the following guidelines
should be followed
● The examiners shall have at least 6 years of Post-Ph.D. experience;
● No two proposed examiners shall be from the same organization; and
● The examiners can be Faculty Members or Scientists, of standing and repute.
● Chairman, Senate may ask for additional names for examiners.
● The Chairman, Senate, shall select minimum two examiners from the proposed list, of
which at least one should be an examiner from outside India. The consent of these
examiners shall be taken before sending the Thesis to them. In addition, SRC and
Supervisor(s) shall be the examiners of the Thesis.
● The Viva Voce will be conducted in the presence of SRC, supervisor(s) and the
external examiner.
● One of the external examiners shall attend the Thesis Defense.
● The examiners shall submit a written report on the thesis within a period of two months
from the date of receipt of the Thesis.
● If both examiners declare the Thesis as acceptable for award of Ph.D. degree, the Dean
(Academics) shall request the Supervisor(s) to hold the Thesis Defense by the student.
● If any of the examiners reject the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, the Dean
(Academics) shall report the matter to the Chairman, Senate, for further consideration.
The Chairman, Senate, will refer the Thesis to a third examiner under special
circumstances; else the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the Ph.D.
program.
● If both examiners reject the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, no degree shall be
awarded by the Institute, and the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the
Ph.D. program.
● If an examiner suggests a revision of the Thesis, the student shall resubmit the Thesis
after the revision within a prescribed time period of 6 months in consultation with the
Supervisor(s).
● When both examiners recommend the Thesis as accepted for the student to defend the
Thesis, or after the resubmission of the Thesis after incorporating the
suggestions/corrections given by the examiners, the student shall publicly present the
Thesis and defend the contention of the Thesis.
● The committee consisting of Chairman SRC, Supervisor(s), the Examiner from within
India and other Faculty Members (quorum would be Chairman, SRC, Supervisor(s) and
an external examiner), who participated in the Comprehensive Examination of the
student, shall evaluate the Thesis Defense of the Ph.D. student also. On their
recommendation, Dean (Academics) shall recommend to Senate, to consider the award
of Ph.D. degree to the student.

27.2 Academic
The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned
the minimum credits as per Section 22.3 for M. Sc., Section 22.4 for M. Tech., Section 22.5 for
M. Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree, Section 22.6 for M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree and Section 22.7 for
Ph.D., while meeting the minimum CGPA requirements as mentioned in Section 22.09.
27.3 No Dues Clearance
Degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as
deemed necessary by Dean (Academics)
27.4 No case of Disciplinary Action
The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if there is
any case of indiscipline pending against her/him.
42
27.5 Award of Degrees
27.5.1 Provisional Certificate
A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 27.1 to 27.4, can
be provided with a provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of
Chairman, Senate.
27.5.2 Degree Certificate
A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 27.1 to 27.4, is
recommended by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate
degree in the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its
approval.
28. AMENDMENTS
Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the
right to modify/amend, without notice, Rules and Regulations of the Postgraduate programmes
at IIT-Jodhpur.

Ongoing Projects 

Biomimetic Nanoscale Metal Organic Frameworks for Targeted Near Infrared Fluorescence Imaging and Phototherapeutic Destruction of Intraperitoneal Tumors
Cellulose nano crystal reinforced pH-responsive PVA-gum tragacanth based proangiogenic wound dressing for diabetic foot care
Development of an AI platform for human health
Development of low cost Microbial carbon capture cells for power generation and algae cultivation
Elucidating the Role of Centrosome Protein CEP152 in Primary Microcephaly
Evaluation of the effect of selected molecules on capsule synthesis by virulent Klebsiella pneumoniae
Expression analysis of inflammasome-forming NLRs in gliomas for Identification of Novel Therapeutic Interventions
Fluorescence Probes for Detection of Amyloid Plaque
Genome India: Cataloguing the genetic variation of Indians

Completed Projects 

Bioremediation of low level wastes including denitrification using microbial fuel cells
Deposition of Particulate Matter in Lungs
How AMFR gene regulates cell division and cancer after stress exposure?
How LRASMI Gene Regulates Cellular Protein Quality Control Functions? Implications In Neurodegeneration And Ageing?
Identification, assessment and characterization of E3 ubiquitin ligases implicated in the neurodegenerative diseases
Role of the Inflammasome Associated Proteins in Glioma
Understanding the molecular function of MGRN1 in Chaperone Mediated Autography
Vigyan Jyoti Pilot Project

Collaborations 

International Collaborations

    Max Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology, Germany
    University Hospital Erlangen, Germany
    Christian-Albrecht University of Kiel, Germany
    Lund University, Sweden
    University of California, Riverside, USA
    University of Washington, Seattle, USA
    University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, USA
    Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Care Centre, USA
    University of Melbourne, Australia
    International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, India
    Riken Brain Science Institute, Japan
    Institute of Environmental Medicine, Nagoya University, Japan
    Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Japan
    ISIR, Osaka University, Japan
    Seoul National University , South Korea
    Kasetsart University, Thailand
    National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan
National Collaborations

    Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
    Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur
    Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay
    Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee
    Indian Institute of Technology, Indore
    Indian Institute of Technology, Mandi
    National Institute of Technology, Rourkela
    All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
    All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur
    Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow
    Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata
    National Brain Research Centre, Gurgaon
    Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai
    Indian Institute of Science Education & Research, Bhopal
    National Institute of Science Education and Research, Bhubaneswar
    Bose Institute, Kolkata
    S. N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Kolkata
    Institute of Bioinformatics and Applied Biotechnology, Bengaluru
    Institute of Bioinformatics, Bengaluru
    Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata
    National Institute of Technical Teachers’ Training and Research, Kolkata
    Advanced Centre for Treatment, Research and Education in Cancer, Mumbai
    Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata
    Christian Medical College, Vellore
    Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore
    Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai
    Central University of Rajasthan, Ajmer
    Panjab University, Chandigarh
    Yenepoya University (Deemed), Mangalore

The Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering is also keen on establishing active collaboration with individuals from academia, R&D laboratories and the industry both within India and abroad, in areas of mutual interest. The domains of these collaborations could include:

        Teaching of courses,
        Organizing Short Courses / Workshops,
        Co-authoring of books,
        Undertaking Joint Research, and
        Developing technologies for diagnostics and treatment by medical professionals.

Memoranda of Understanding

We have active Memoranda of Understanding with:

 	1. 	All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur

 	2.	National Law University, Jodhpur,

 	3.	CSIR - Institute of Genomics & Integrative Biology, New Delhi

 	4.	Council for Scientific & Industrial Research

which allows us to effectively conduct research and offer courses in interdisciplinary areas. We are also interested in establishing MoUs with National Laboratories, Technological Institutes and Industry Partners.

Faculty Profiles

Prof Amit Kumar Mishra
Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Developmental Biology
Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience, Cell Cycle Regulation and Cancer
Personal Information
Prof Amit Kumar Mishra
Male
Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, - 342037

Experience

    2023 - Present
    Professor

    Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
    2019 - 2023
    Associate Professor

    Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
    2010 - 2019
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2008
    Ph.D

    National Brain Research Centre

Dr Meenu Chhabra
Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Developmental Biology
Biological Science and Bio-Engineering, Renewable Bioenergy Bioremediation
Personal Information
Dr Meenu Chhabra
Female
Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, - 342037

Experience

    2023 - Present
    Professor

    Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
    2019 - 2023
    Associate Professor

    Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
    2011 - 2019
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2010
    Ph.D

    Indian Institute of Technology Delhi

Dr Sushmita Jha
Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Biology
Organoids, 3D Models of Brain tumours and Breast cancer, Innate Immunity, Inflammation, Neuroimmunology, Cell and Molecular Physiology
Personal Information
Dr Sushmita Jha
Female
Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
, , India - 342037

    http://home.iitj.ac.in/~sushmitajha/ 

Experience

    2023 - Present
    Professor

    Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
    2019 - 2023
    Associate Professor

    Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
    2012 - 2019
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2011
    Postdoctoral Research Associate

    Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Care Centre, UNC School of Medicine, USA
    2009
    Ph.D

    University of North Carolina
    2004
    M.Sc

    MS University Baroda
    2002
    BSc

    St. Joseph's College of Arts and Science, Bangalore

Honours and Awards
2024
Research Excellence Award (Publication/Technology developed)

Indian Institute of Technology
2022
President's Award for Outstanding Work in Neuro-Oncology, 2022

Indian Society of Neuro-Oncology (ISNO)
2021
Kusum Sharma Award for a Young Woman Scientist

Indian Academy of Biomedical Sciences
Read More
Doctoral Theses Guided
2021
Dopamine Induces Functional Extracellular Traps in Microglia

Ishan Agrawal, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
2020
Investigation of Cellular and Molecular Pathways of Innate Immunity in Context of Glioma Pathophysiology and Cellular Inflammation

Shalini Singh, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
2020
The Role of Nod-like receptors (NLRs) in Glioma Microenvironment

Shivanjali Saxena, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
Read More
Membership In Professional Bodies
2021
The Indian Society of Neuro-Oncology

Life Member
2020
Indian academy of Biomedical Sciences

Life Member
2020
The American Association of Immunologists

Regular

Dr Surajit Ghosh
Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Miscellaneous Biology
Chemical Neurobiology, Chemical Biology and Cancer Biology
Personal Information
Dr Surajit Ghosh
Male
Department of Bioscience Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering, IIT Jodhpur, NH 65 Nagaur Road, Karwar 342 037, Jodhpur, Rajasthan
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342037

    iitj.ac.in 

Experience

    2019 - Present
    Professor

    Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2008
    Ph.D

    Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur

Prof Mitali Mukerji
Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Genetics and Heredity
Genomics, Human molecular genetics, functional genomics of Alu repeats, Ayurgenomics, genetics of rare diseases,
Personal Information
Prof Mitali Mukerji
Female
Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, NH- 65, Nagaur Road, Karwar
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342037

Experience

    2021 - Present
    Professor

    Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
    2000 - 2021
    Scientist

    CSIR-Institute of Genomics & Integrative Biology Delhi University

Qualification

    1997
    Ph.D.

    Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
    1991
    M.Sc.

    Indian Agricultural Research Institute
    1988
    B.Sc.

    University of Allahabad

Dr Priyanka Singh
Associate Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Biology
Centrosome Biology; Cell division; Cancer Biology
Personal Information
Dr Priyanka Singh
Female
Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, - 342037

Experience

    2023 - Present
    Associate Professor

    Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
    2017 - 2023
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
    2014 - 2017
    Post-Doctoral Fellow

    Max Planck Institute for Molecular Physiology
    2011 - 2014
    Post-Doctoral Fellow

    University of Basel, Switzerland

Qualification

    2011
    Ph.D

    University of Muenster

Honours and Awards
2018
Early Career Research Award

SERB, DST, Govt. of India
2015
Alexander von Humboldt Post Doctoral fellowship

Humboldt Foundation Germany
2014
Max Planck Post Doctoral fellowship

Max Plank Society, Germany

Dr Shankar Manoharan
Associate Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

 Expertise
Biology
Molecular Microbiology, Host-Microbe Interaction, Genomics and Metagenomics
Personal Information
Dr Shankar Manoharan
Male
Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, NH 65 Nagaur Road, Karwar,
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342037

    http://home.iitj.ac.in/~shankarmanoharan 

Experience

    2023 - Present
    Associate Professor

    Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
    2017 - 2023
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2016
    Post-doctoral Fellowship

    University of Kansas Medical Center
    2013
    Ph.D

    Madurai Kamaraj University
    2008
    M.Sc.

    Madurai Kamaraj University
    2006
    B.Sc.

    Madurai Kamaraj University

Honours and Awards
2017
Early Career Fellowship

Wellcome Trust / DBT India Alliance
Membership In Professional Bodies
2018
Biotechnology Research Society of India

Life Member
2018
Association of Microbiologists in India

Life Member
2018
Microbiology Society, UK

Member

Dr Neha Jain
Associate Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Biology
Amyloids, Biofilms, Neurodegeneration, Molecular Biophysics, Microbiology
Personal Information
Dr Neha Jain
Female
321 Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering, IIT Jodhpur, NH 65 Nagaur Road, Karwar 342 037, Jodhpur, Rajasthan
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342037

Experience

    2023 - Present
    Associate Professor

    Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
    2019 - 2023
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Bioscience and Bioengineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2013
    Ph.D

    Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Mohali

Honours and Awards
2019
ASM-IUSSTF Visiting Research Professorship

American Society for Microbiology
Membership In Professional Bodies
2019
American Society for Microbiology

Annual


Announcement 

1 	List of Provisionally Shortlisted Candidates for PhD Admission (AY 2025-26, Spring session, Sem-II). Date of interview of shortlisted candidate 03rd November 2025
2 	The list of Ph.D. (BSBE) candidates provisionally shortlisted for admission (AY 2025-26, Semester I), as well as the waitlisted candidates
3 	List of M.Tech (BSBE) candidates provisionally shortlisted for admission (AY 2025-26, Semester I), as well as the waitlisted candidates
4 	List of Provisionally Shortlisted Candidates for PhD Admission Autumn session (AY 2025-26) . Date of interview of shortlisted candidate 09/05/2025
5 	List Of Shortlisted M.Tech (Without fellowship/ self sponsored) Candidate. Date of interview of shortlisted candidate 07/05/2025
6 	The list of Ph.D (BSBE) candidates provisionally shortlisted for Interview (AY 2024-25 Semester II)
7 	List of Provisionally Selected Candidates for M.Tech (With Fellowship) Admission (AY 2024-25 Semester I)


Welcome to Department of Chemistry & Head's Message

A warm welcome to the Department of Chemistry at IIT Jodhpur, which was established in 2015. Since the inception, the department has taken major strides forward in teaching, research and technology development. Our department offers a variety of academic programs including M.Sc. (2 Years), M.Sc. (Chemistry)-M.Tech. (Materials Engineering) with Specialization, BS in Chemistry with Specialization (4 years), and Ph.D. programs. We also provide core and elective courses in chemistry and related fields for undergraduate B.Tech. engineering students. The department offers Chemistry courses for 4-year Integrated B.Sc.-B.Ed. Program (ITEP), which is in alignment with NEP 2020 to support teacher preparation and foster professional development.

Besides teaching, the Department is striving to be acknowledged for excellence in research and technology. Our goal is to foster an environment where everyone can thrive, reach their full potential, and contribute to cutting-edge scientific advancements. We have the latest state of the art basic teaching laboratories and several thematic research laboratories. Our current faculty strength is 19 and they are carrying out research activities in all major areas of chemical sciences, namely, organic synthesis and catalysis, chemical biology, main group chemistry and organometallics, nanomaterials, spectroscopy and chemical dynamics, biophysical chemistry and computational chemistry. The cutting-edge research in the thrust areas by our faculty members are published in international peer-reviewed journals of well-repute. In short IIT Jodhpur Chemistry department is where Chemistry meets Technology through Collaboration, Communication and Cooperation. I encourage the future aspirants to get enrolled at IIT Jodhpur and wish you all the very best in your future endeavours. Thank you.

B.S. in Chemistry with Specialization
An Engineering linked Undergraduate Program

This undergraduate program has been designed to transmit fundamental knowledge in basic science and engineering during the first few semesters, which develops critical analytical thinking and forms the basis of diverse skill sets used by scientists and engineers to innovate, design, and develop technologies for the future. Students undergo comprehensive training in advanced concepts of chemistry for the next two years. The inclusion of a substantial component of courses from other science and engineering departments makes the program quite interdisciplinary in nature. The final year of the curriculum is designed towards specialization in a focused area. The flexibility of opting for different specializations is ingrained in formulating the structure and curriculum of the programme. During these years, the students get to experience the joys and rigors of original research currently being pursued and consider a variety of career paths through capability-linked specializations of their choice. In the specialization, emphasis is given to the emerging areas in Chemistry to meet societal and industrial needs, and ever-growing sustainability demands. The graduating students of this program shall be equipped with requisite skill-sets required to assume leadership positions in the different sectors of industry, further their career in higher studies, or embark on entrepreneurial ventures to address present day unmet challenges of the country.

We Offer
 Objectives

    To equip new generation aspiring minds with engineering linked chemical science skill sets enabling them to opt for challenging career paths at various levels of academia and industry

    To impart education towards understanding of the concepts of chemical science, basic engineering, and allied areas enabling the students to tackle societal problems through an interdisciplinary approach

    To integrate analytical and computational abilities with experimental skills to create individuals competent in professional science practices

    To facilitate and promote entry into research at an early stage through a flexible and border less curriculum

    To inculcate an attitude towards commitment to scientific ethics, leadership qualities, entrepreneurship, and professional development for the future generation

    To instill the approach of collaborative research between academia and industry targeting sustainability.



Opportunities

    P. C. Ray Fellowship of Rs. 50,000 for every semester if a student continues to maintain CGPA 8.0 every semester.

    Fully paid international conference/internship of two months duration during summer term.

Learning Outcomes

    Acquire strong fundamentals in theoretical and practical aspects of organic, inorganic and physical chemistry as well as other branches of basic science and engineering. 

    Apply the concepts of science and basic engineering to analyze and design complex novel materials, and molecular complexes having potential applications to society.

    Develop skills on hands-on wet chemistry, analytical, instrumentation, and experimental data handling to tackle scientific problems.

    Perform literature review and patent landscaping for innovative research.

    Develop communication skills by participating in classroom presentations, seminars and workshops on manuscript / patent writing / presentation skills.

    Value of team work and group discussion in problem solving, and time management to continue co-curricular activities without compromising academics.

    To understand professional ethics and social responsibilities.

Graduate Attributes

    Strong understanding of fundamentals of science and engineering with emphasis on chemical science.

    A strong foundation in the analytical, experimental, and computational methods to study various aspects of chemical science.

    Foundations for critical thinking that are needed to broaden their careers in diverse cross-disciplines.

    Ability to acquire new knowledge, integrate in the existing paradigm, and innovate solutions as per the requirement. 

    Capability to appreciate synthetic methods for the development of important chemical products such as pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, paints, petrochemicals, food additives, plastics, etc. 

    Ability to handle analytical, spectroscopic, microscopic and other instrumentation methods for interdisciplinary research areas. 

    Use of computational tools to understand and analyse chemical and biophysical processes, molecular structures and advanced materials.

    Ability to comprehend, write, and present scientific articles and technical reports.

    Ability to engage in ethical and responsible practices while pursuing professional growth.


Post Graduate Program
Introduction

The Department of Chemistry hosts a two-year M.Sc. Chemistry   (Download file 1033 KB) Program in Chemistry. The primary objective of M.Sc. Chemistry program at IIT Jodhpur is to bring out professionals with the fundamental knowledge and skill sets of various aspects of Chemistry. The program comprises a strong collection of courses spanning among organic, inorganic, physical, and theoretical chemistry with associated laboratory and hands-on sessions to provide practical knowledge. As part of the M.Sc. program, students carry out one major and one minor research project under the guidance of the faculty members of the department to get an exposure to the modern research going on in various subdomains of chemistry.

Objective of the Programme

The major objective of the program is to bring out professionals having fundamental knowledge, and specific skill sets of various aspects of chemistry such as Organic Reactions and their Mechanism, Main-Group and Transition Metals, Organometallics and Catalysis, Physical and Spectroscopic techniques, Inorganic and Solid State Material synthesis, Computational and Theoretical Chemistry. The department focuses on preparing future students to take up challenges at various levels of academics, R&Ds and industries.
Expected Graduate Attributes

    Capability to appreciate synthetic methods for development of important chemical products such as pharmaceutical drugs, paints, petrochemicals, food additives, plastics etc
    Ability to use characterization tools for analysing reactions and monitoring chemical processes for product development
    Ability to handle analytical, spectroscopic, microscopic and other instrumental methods for interdisciplinary research areas
    Use of computational tools to understand and analyse chemical and biophysical processes, molecular structures and advanced materials
    Ability to comprehend, write and present scientific articles and technical reports
    Develop oral and written communication skills
    Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics and sense of intellectual integrity
    Ability to plan and manage technical research projects and work in a team


Learning Outcomes

    Strong fundamentals in theoretical and practical aspects of organic, inorganic and physical chemistry
    Develop appreciation of hands-on wet chemistry, analytical, instrumentation, and experimental data handling skills to solve scientific problems to address technological challenges in various domains
    Knowledge of computational and theoretical chemistry
    Skills for material synthesis and processes for device integration
    Develop the ability to exercise independent learning, thinking and problem solving skills
    Develop the ability to interact in a cross-cultural environment and acquire time and project management skills for carrying out guided research work in any of the research areas related to science and technology
    Develop skills to communicate scientific learning and present ideas

 

Duration: 2 years 

Proposed Intake: 38 (including EWS)

Eligibility: JAM (Chemistry) qualified candidates will be considered as per the existing norms of M.Sc. programs.  

Faculty Coordinator: Prof. Ananya Debnath (Email: ananya@iitj.ac.in)


Doctoral Program
Introduction

The department of chemistry hosts Ph.D. program in Chemistry.  The objective of the program is to provide unique opportunities and a vibrant environment to the motivated researchers to perform research in both fundamental and applied areas of chemistry. Our PhD program provides opportunities to students in a wide array of chemical disciplines including Computational Molecular Biophysics and Gas-Phase Reaction Dynamics, Quantum Information Processing, Biophysical Chemistry using fluorescence spectroscopy and NMR,  Nanomaterials & Nanodevices, Advanced Materials Chemistry,  Asymmetric Catalysis, Natural Products & Medicinally Active Compounds Synthesis, Catalysis for Energy, Environment Remidiation, Water and Soil Chemistry, Asymmetric and Homogeneous Catalysis, Synthesis of Organic Compounds, Alternative Biofuels, Main-group Organometallic Chemistry. 

PhD students have the freedom to choose their courses and research topics for thesis research. Moreover, we encourage graduate students to rotate in several different labs for first semester while taking the courses under guidance of Department Research Committee (DRC). PhD students have many opportunities for professional development, including teaching, communication, networking, outreach, and participation in regional, national, and international conferences and meetings. They are also part of departmental committees such as seminars, classes etc. These activities, together with research, make our students competitive for many career paths that include academia, industry, government, and national laboratories, among others. The institute offers unique opportunity to a PhD student to avail one-year fellowship for any translational activities related to the thesis upon submission. The patent-landscaping being an integral part of the research plan and PhD curriculum at IIT Jodhpur is another unique feature.


IMPORTANT NOTE:

Rolling Advertisement for Admission to Ph.D. Programs


    Link to fill online application form
    For further information, click here
    For information about research areas, Applicants are strongly advised to visit the webpages of faculty members


Contact us

    Issues related to online application: office_academics_pg@iitj.ac.in
    Issues related to payments: oa_automation@iitj.ac.in
    Details about PhD program: office_chemistry@iitj.ac.in

Watch/follow/connect: Facebook/ Twitter


Note: Students can apply for PhD position throughout the year...

Interviews for prospective doctoral students are held twice during the year (May and December) following which they can join from the semester beginning after getting accepted. Candidates get enrolled to the department and take course work in consultation with the Department Research Committee and Faculty Advisor and generally start their research work under the respective faculty member from the second semester. Doctoral students are also engaged in Teaching Assistantship (TA) duties in supervising undergraduate laboratories and courses.


Students enrolled in PhD program of Department, may contact DRC:

DRC Chairman: Prof. Sandip Murarka

DRC Convenor and Ph.D. Program Coordinator: Prof. Rakesh Kumar Sharma

DRC member and M.Sc. Program Coordinator: Prof. Ananya Debnath

 Biography

Dr. Murarka pursued his PhD from WWU Münster under the supervision of Prof. Armido Studer. After completing his Ph.D. (2013), he worked as a Max-Planck postdoctoral research fellow in the laboratory of Prof. Herbert Waldmann at Max Planck Institute of Molecular Physiology, Dortmund (2013-2016). Following a year-long stay (2016-2017) as a Team Leader in a reputed pharmaceutical company, Syngene International Limited, he decided to return to academia. In May 2017, he joined the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, India, as an Assistant Professor and was promoted to the post of Associate Professor in June 2022.

He is a recipient of the prestigious ‘Institute Senior Researcher Award (Science Category)’ by IIT Jodhpur, ‘The Early Career Research Award’ by SERB, Government of India, ‘The Thieme Chemistry Journal Award’ by Thieme, and ‘The Merck Young Scientist Award’ by Merck. He is an Early Career Advisory Board Member (ECAB) of several journals, such as ChemistrySelect (Wiley-VCH), Chemistry an Asian Journal (Wiley-VCH), and Organic Chemistry Frontiers (RSC). He is also a Fellow of the Indian Chemical Society (FICS) and a Member of the Royal Society of Chemistry (MRSC).

Research

Sandip Murarka
Dr. Murarka’s current research activities include the study of novel activation modes and the development of chemoselective and sustainable synthetic transformations. His research group utilizes sustainable chemical tools, such as base-metal catalysis, photocatalysis, and electro-organic synthesis, to convert feedstock chemicals to value-added compounds and pharmaceutically relevant molecular architectures. The thrust areas of research in his group include:

    Radical Chemistry
    Photoinduced Synthetic Transformations
    Electrochemistry in Organic Synthesis
    Transition Metal Catalyzed Cross-Couplings
    C-H Functionalizations
    Medicinal Chemistry

Rakesh Kumar Sharma
 About us

We are a diverse group of chemists and material scientists specializing in catalysis, feed-stock chemistry, energy harvesting and storage, environmental remediation and fuels. Our goal is to understand fundamental chemical processes and also to develop highly efficient materials inspired by nature. We develop simple, reproducible and scalable methods for sustainable science. The research undertaken in our group is intended to have far lasting implications to utilize and design materials for applications that are required by a booming technology minding the effect on the environment. We nurture philosophy of collaboration expedites new discoveries and innovations. We engage with, international universities, inter-institutional, numerous government agencies and industries to harvest the benefits of our research work for end-users.

Samanwita Pal

Biography

Dr. Samanwita Pal is an NMR spectroscopist and a Professor at the Department of Chemistry, IIT Jodhpur. She earned a BSc. (Hons.) from Jadavpur University and a MSc degree in Chemistry from IIT Madras. She further received her PhD in small molecule NMR and NQR spectroscopy from IIT Madras in 2010 under the supervision of Prof. N. Chandrakumar. She pursued her postdoctoral fellowship in the group of Prof. Stephan Grzesiek at Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland during 2010-2012. She joined the Department of Chemistry, IIT Jodhpur in 2012 December as an Assistant Professor. Currently she is continuing as a Professor at the Department of Chemistry.

Dr. Pal received Ratna Rao Memorial prize and Dr. S. R. Ramadas 60th Birthday Commemoration award for best academic record in Chemistry during the period 2002-2004. She earned the prestigious Prof Langmuir Prize for best PhD Thesis in Physical and Theoretical Chemistry from IIT Madras in 2010. She has served as an elected Executive Committee member of the National Magnetic Resonance Society, India from March 2021 for a period of three years. She has published several articles in reputed journals and presented her findings in numerous national and international meetings as an invited speaker.

Research

Dr. Pal is working in small molecule solution-state and solid-state NMR and NQR for past two decades. Her research interest at present focusses on design and application of NMR methods to decipher molecular dynamics and interactions relevant in a variety of areas ranging from energy, environment to defence and medicine. Her research group utilizes the 500 MHz WB NMR spectrometer from the central facility and a 20 MHz Time Domain (TD) NMR spectrometer housed in her research laboratory. The research group majorly implements NMR relaxation, diffusion and magnetization transfer methods. Some of the current thrust areas the group is working in are as follows:

    NMR relaxometry, diffusometry and Cryoporometry
    Small molecule solution state magnetization transfer and correlation experiments
    NMR Solid state ion dynamics in porous materials
    NMR chemical exchange in condensed phase
    NQR detection and instrumentation
    Pulse sequence design and modification 

Ramesh K Metre
Biography

Dr. Ramesh K. Metre received his M.Sc. degree in Chemistry from the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Madras and obtained his Ph.D. from the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India, in 2014 under the supervision of Professor V. Chandrasekhar. He had a brief stint of postdoctoral studies at NISER Bhubaneshwar and KAUST, SA. In 2016, he joined as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, India. He is currently serving as an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemistry, IIT Jodhpur.

He is recipient of many awards and recognitions such as, Teaching Excellence Award 2023, IIT Jodhpur, Senior Researcher Award (Science) 2025, IIT Jodhpur and Early Carrier Research Award, SERB, DST.  he has published several articles in reputed journals and presented his research work in various national and international meetings as an invited speaker

Research

The synthesis and study of redox-active ligands and their metal complexes represent a frontier in molecular materials chemistry. Our current research interests include the design, synthesis and structure of novel redox-active multinuclear transition as well as main group organometallic compounds with application in molecular materials for Resistive Random Access Memory and Electrochemical devices. 

Koushambi Mitra


Biography

Koushambi Mitra obtained her bachelor's degree in chemistry from Presidency College, University of Calcutta (2006-2009). Mitra then joined as an integrated MS-PhD student at the Indian Institute of Science and developed platinum complexes as light activated DNA crosslinking and anticancer agents (2009-2016). Thereafter, Mitra did a series of brief postdoctoral stints (Virginia Commonwealth University, 2016-2018; and the University of Texas at Dallas, 2018-2020) where she switched her research interests to organic synthesis and chemical biology. She developed unique photocages for cancer drug delivery and activity-based sensors for detection of enzymatic activity in living neuronal cells. In her last postdoc at the University of Chicago (2020-2024), she developed ratiometric sensors for quantitative imaging of organellar sodium ions. Currently, Mitra is an assistant professor in the department of chemistry at IIT Jodhpur (July, 2024) where her research interests lie in the highly interdisciplinary areas of chemical biology.

Research

We are developing cutting-edge chemical technologies to understand the biochemical and chemical environment of organelles. Our main approach is to enable the chemistry done in reaction vessels to occur in a much complex cellular milieu. Though substantial advances have been made to understand the cell as a whole entity, we still lack probes and methods to study biological processes specifically in organelles in living system as a function of time. To meet this dire need, we are designing and developing chemical platforms which will allow us to map and correlate organelles based on morphological and functional properties.

The ongoing projects of our research group are:

1. Developing organelle-targeted fluorescent probes for physiological ions and metabolites and study them in the context of health and diseases

2. Developing activity-based chemical probes for detecting enzyme activities of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and reductive pathways

3. Developing biorthogonal and bioconjugation reactions for specific tagging of metabolites or proteins in the organelles


Dibyendu Kumar Sasmal

Biography

Dr. Dibyendu K. Sasmal is an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemistry at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, where he has been serving since July 2023, following his tenure as an Assistant Professor from 2019 to 2023. His academic journey began with a Bachelor of Science (Honors) in Chemistry from Medinipur College, Vidyasagar University, in 2005, followed by a Master of Science (M.Sc.) in Chemistry with a specialization in Physical Chemistry in 2007. He earned his Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry in 2012 from the Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata, under the guidance of Professor Kankan Bhattacharyya. Post-Ph.D., he conducted postdoctoral research at Bowling Green State University, Ohio, USA, with Professor H. Peter Lu, followed by research at the Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering, University of Chicago, under Professor Jun Huang, and later at the Center for Nanoscale Materials, Argonne National Laboratory, Illinois, with Professor Tijana Rajh.

Research

Dr. Sasmal and his group is interested to understand complex interplay among structure, function, and dynamics of bio-molecules present either in condensed phase or cellular environment at single molecular level in real-time. Conventional ensemble methods can only give information related to molecular function which are average of property with respect to time. However, single-molecule spectroscopy has an unique capabilities for distinguishing molecular properties with spatiotemporal resolution of sub-nano meter and pico-seconds. Their approach is highly interdisciplinary combining molecular spectroscopy, molecular biology, optics and advanced fluorescence microscopy. The group is currently investigating the pattern of conformational dynamics of DNA, protein and RNA. They are also trying to understand how immune cells distinguish between self and foreign antigens at single molecule level in real time. Drug-protein interaction in condensed phase, and development of quantum dot based drug carrier, fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) and fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) are also topic of research for this group. 

Ananya Debnath

Biography

Prof Debnath is currently a professor in the Department of Chemistry, IIT Jodhpur. She joined IIT jodhpur as an assistant professor in 2013. Before joining Jodhpur, she worked as a post doctoral fellow in Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt, Germany in 2013 for a short duration. Prior to that she worked as a Max Planck post dostoral fellow at Max Planck Institute of Polymer Science, Mainz, Germany from 2009-2012. She was a research associate at Department of Chemical Engineering and Department of Physics in Indian Institute of Science (IISc) Bangalore from 2007-2009. She obtained her PhD from Department of Inorganic and Physical Chemistry from IISc Bangalore in 2008 under the supervision of Prof K. L. Sebastian.

 

Research

Prof Debnath’s current research broadly envisages on understanding of biological processes using principles of classical statistical mechanics. Her group uses modeling tools ranging from multi-scale modeling, molecular dynamics simulations combined with machine learning techniques to study the structure, thermodynamics and dynamics of proteins, lipids, water at the micro and meso-scale as well as the analytical theory at the macro-scale to investigate different processes involving biological chain and macromolecules.  The group is particularly interested in

    Water dynamics near soft and bio molecules
    Structure and Dynamics of Biological Membranes
    Trans-membrane and Peripheral Proteins
    Protein-Ligand Binding
    Dynamics and Reaction Rates of Activated Processes involving Polymers
    Glass Transitions and Dynamical Heterogeneity in Biomembranes
    Self-assembly of Bio-inspired Soft Materials 


Manikandan Paranjothy

Biography

Prof. Manikandan Paranjothy completed Ph.D. in 2009 from the department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, under the supervision of Prof. Srihari Keshavamurthy. He carried out three years of post-doctoral work in the research group of Prof. William L. Hase, at Texas Tech University, USA. He joined Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur in 2013 as Assistant Professor and became Associate Professor in 2019 and Professor in 2023. His research interests include chemical reaction dynamics, direct dynamics simulations of organic reactions, and reactions at heterogeneous interfaces. His research group is actively involved in developing machine learning based potential energy surfaces for performing reaction dynamics calculations.  

Research

Our broad research area is Theoretical and Computational Chemistry. In our research group, we use Quantum Chemistry and Classical Trajectory methods to study interesting chemical reactions occurring in Interstellar, Combustion, and Atmospheric Chemistry. Specific research topics are: 

* Unimolecular and Bimolecular Reaction Dynamics in Gas Phase

* Machine Learning Potentials for Classical Trajectory Simulations

* Direct Dynamics (on-the-fly) Trajectory Simulations 

* Electronic Structure Theory



About Research
Research Areas

    Department of Chemistry @IIT Jodhpur presently emphasizes on five primary research areas of Inorganic Chemistry, Organic Chemistry, Physical Chemistry, Material Chemistry and Computational Chemistry.
    The importance of the Department’s research in the real world is exemplified by our industrial collaborations.
    Faculty Members are involved in following major thrust areas:
Research Facilities

    The department of chemistry has taken major initiatives and played an active role in the setting up of advanced instrumentation facility for the Department as well as the Institute at Centre for Advanced Scientific Equipment.
    Some of the research facilities include a Differential Scanning Calorimeter, Simultaneous Thermal Analyser, Powder X-ray diffractometer, Single crystal X-ray diffractometer, Atomic Force Microscope (Park XE-70), Scanning Electron Microscope with Electron Dispersion Spectrometer, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer (500 MHz), UV-vis spectrometers, Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), Fluorescence spectrometer, Surface area analyzer (Physisorption and CHemisorption analysers), Dynacool-PPMS, SQUID, Raman spectrometer, Thermal Evaporator, Furnaces, Glove Box, Solar Simulator etc.

Ongoing Projects
Some of the prominent on-going Sponsored Research Projects include:

1. Multiparticle Entanglement, Nonlocality and Quantum Information processing- Analysing the role and applications of statistical correlations Core Research Grant,

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Atul Kumar, PI (2019-22)

Project Description:

For bi-partite or multi qubit systems, the distinction between quantum and classical resources are laid down in terms of the Bell or Bell-type inequalities whose violation confirms the existence of quantum correlations in the system. The Bell-type inequalities for three-qubit pure entangled systems itself either fail to distinguish between bipartite and tripartite inequalities or fail to identify the presence of nonlocal correlations in a large set of states. The intricacy of the problem increases further considering the real conditions. Moreover, discord- a measure of genuine nonlocal correlations- is difficult to evaluate analytically due to the optimization procedures involved. A simple description that can be obtained analytically to distinguish the quantum and classical boundaries would therefore be of great value. Hence, the relationship between entanglement, correlations, and non-classicality needs adequate attention to analyse, evaluate and understand the importance and significance of quantum correlations in communication and computing. In this project, we aim to provide a general description of entangled systems which may provide a consistent definition of entanglement in bi-partite as well as multipartite pure states. The approach developed for pure states will also be extended to family of mixed states. Our study will be based on the distinction of quantum and classical correlations for understanding the relation between entanglement, nonlocality, and efficiencies of different quantum information processing protocols.

2. Chiral Calix Crowns for asymmetric phase transfer catalyst DST Women Scientist (WOS-A),

Department of Chemistry

Pragati R. Sharma, PI (2019-22)

Project Description:

Calix[n]arenes (n=4,6,8) have been widely studied due to their three-dimensional shape and ease of functionalization. The synthetic flexibility of calixarenes makes them a suitable candidate for a wide range of applications that include molecular recognition, sensors and variable architectures. The Phase transferability of Calix-crowns plays a very important role for various biological and pharmaceutical applications, most interest in the development of enantioselective reactions to obtain optically active molecules. In this proposal PI will develop novel series of chiral Calix-crown derivatives with systemic variation in chiral functionalities such as chiral amines and esters in the lower rim, exploiting four phenolic OH groups for catalytic applications. These novel chiral calix-crown PTC are sensitive towards cations, lead to asymmetric induction for industrially important alkylation of C=X (X=N, S, C) and Tsuji-Trost allylic alkylation.

Publications:

    S. Pandey, P. R. Sharma, V.K. Soni, G. Choudhary and R.K. Sharma, Cucurbit[6]uril and 4-tert-Butylcalix[6]arene as Multifunctional Lubricant Additives, New Journal of Chemistry, 2020,44,3425-3433
    P. R. Sharma, S. Pandey, V. K. Soni, G. Choudhary, R.K. Sharma, Macroscopic Recognition of Iodide by Polymer Appended Calix[4]amidocrown Resin, 2019, Supramolecular Chemistry, 31, 634-644 

3. Impact of Rainwater Harvesting on Groundwater Quality in India with Specific Reference to Fluoride and Mircropollutants

Department of Science & Technology (DST), Government of India

Rakesh Kumar Sharma, PI (2018-21)

Project Description:

Groundwater is the main source of freshwater in many parts of the world however excessive abstraction is causing a continuous decrease in water tables in some places. In Rajasthan on the Western side of India, methods are being utilized to replenish groundwater and provide a reliable water supply. This is achieved in several ways including the use of Rainwater Harvesting (RWH) systems. These structures capture rainwater and runoff and allow it to infiltrate into the subsurface and subsequently aquifers. In India this has been achieved both through traditional approaches such as storing water in percolation ponds and in check dams. The use of more novel emerging approaches such as sand dams has also been explored. A sand dam is a concrete wall built across a seasonal riverbed. During the rainy season, a seasonal river forms and carries sand downstream. The sand accumulates behind the dam and is filled with water providing storage, this water can then be abstracted or percolate into the groundwater. Although these techniques increase water availability it is unclear as to their effect on groundwater quality. Depending on the scale and location of RWH structures, rainwater contained within them may contain a range of harmful substances. These pollutants could travel through the RWH structures and contaminate the groundwater. Additionally, in Rajasthan, high fluoride concentrations in the groundwater are a major health concern. Excessive fluoride in drinking water causes dental and skeletal fluorosis. This problem may be worsened as dissolved organic matter (DOM) present in harvested rainwater which has been found to increase fluoride levels during recharge. The analysis of the transport of pollutants and DOM in RWH structures is thus of crucial importance in ensuring groundwater quality. This transport can be effected by a number of different factors most notably design and location of these structures.

The field work will be carried out to monitor the water quality used for recharge and groundwater in the vicinity of the three RWH structures over a period of two years. This will include topographical surveys, groundwater level monitoring, water sampling, tracer testing, weather recording and obtaining soil samples to provide information on the mineral characteristics of the aquifer material. In addition, laboratory testing will be completed on water samples obtained from the field. The quality of the rainwater and groundwater will be assessed using a variety of techniques. Parameters tested will include nutrients, e.coli, heavy metals and pharmaceuticals amongst others. To enhance our understanding of the impact of DOM present in rainwater on Fluoride levels in groundwater, fluorescence excitation-emission matrix (F-EEM) will be used. Pollutant transport models which simulate pollutant transport and DOM interaction with fluoride in RWH structures and across the whole catchment will be created.

Publications:

    Parker, A., Lise, N., Sharma, R.K., et al (2019) Managed aquifer recharge and its impact on fluoride contamination in Rajasthan, Hydrochemistry and Human Health processdngs, GH21A-04; 2019AGUFMGH21A..04P (American Geophysical Union)
    Singh,J., Vija, K.L., Sharma,R.K., et.al. (2019) Estimation of Soil Water Retention Characteristics of a Novel Artificial Recharge System located in Laporiya, Rajasthan, Groundwater, xx, xxx
    Nunes-Pereiraa,J., Lima,R., Choudhary,G., Sharma,P.R., Ferdov,S., Botelho,G., Sharma,R.K., and Lanceros-Mendez,S., (2018), “Highly efficient removal of fluoride from aqueous media through polymer composite membranes,” Separation and Purification Technology, (Elsevier), Vol. 205 pp 1-10
    Shejale,K.P., Laishram,D., Gupta, R., and Sharma,R.K., (2018), “Engineered ZnO-TiO2 Nanospheres for High Performing Membrane Assimilated Photocatalytic Water Remediation and Energy Harvesting,” ChemistrySelect (Wiley), Vol. 3, pp 7291-7301

4. Development of Catalytic Diastereo and Enantiodivergent Tandem Reactions

Department of Science & Technology (DST), Government of India

Nirmal Kumar Rana, PI (2018-20)

Project Description:

In Nature many organic compounds exist in stereoisomers and they often exhibit different chemical and biological properties. Organic molecules having cyclohexane core with multiple stereogenic centres are common structural subunits found in many natural products and pharmaceuticals. Several recent studies in asymmetric synthesis are reported for their synthesis. Nonetheless, despite the great progress made on asymmetric catalysis in the past decades, for compounds containing multiple stereogenic centers, it still remains a great challenge to freely access all the possible stereoisomers. This project is focused to establish new approaches for the synthesis of diversely substituted cyclohexane in a stereodivergent fashion.

Publications:

    K. Rana, K. Shukla, P. Mahto, R. K. Jha, V. K. Singh, A facile and highly diastereoselective synthesis of carbocyclic spiro-pyrazolones via DABCO catalyzed Michael-Michael domino reaction, Tetrahedron, 2018, 74, 5270-5279
    Shukla, S. Shah, N. K. Rana, V. K. Singh, An efficient and highly diastereoselective synthesis of carbocyclic spiropyrazolones via one-pot sequential dual organo-silver catalyzed Michael-hydroalkylation reactions, Tetrahedron Letters 2019, 60, 92-97
    Mahto, N. K. Rana, K. Shukla, B. G. Das, H. Joshi, V. K. Singh, Asymmetric Multifunctional Modular Organocatalysis: One-Pot Direct Strategy to Enantiopure α,β-Disubstituted γ-Butyrolactones, Org. Lett. 2019, 21, 5962-5966

5. Tandem Annulations Involving Metallocarbenes: Towards Diverse Molecular Architectures

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Sandip Murarka, PI (2018-21)

Project Description:

Transition-metal carbenes/carbenoids as active intermediates play an important role in modern organic synthesis. They undergo a wide variety of synthetic transformations, such as, cycloadditions, cyclopropanations, etc. among many others. These transformations have proven to be valuable tools in the construction of complex molecular scaffolds. The investigator proposes to develop novel reaction technologies to exploit the reactivity of carbenoids in a range of diverse cascade annulation processes to afford myriad of molecular architectures.

Publications:

    R. Budhwan, S. Yadav, S. Murarka*, Late Stage Functionalization of Heterocycles Using Hypervalent Iodine(III) Reagents, Org. Biomol. Chem. 2019, 17, 6326.
    S. Das, S. K. Parida, T. Mandal, L. Sing, S. De Sarkar*, S. Murarka*, Organophotoredox Catalyzed Cascade Radical Annulation of 2-(Allyloxy)arylaldehydes with N-(acyloxy)phthalimides: Towards Alkylated Chroman-4-one Derivatives, Chem. Asian J. 2020, 15, 568.
    R. Budhwan, G. Garg, I. N. N. Namboothiri*, S. Murarka*, Hypervalent Iodine(III) Reagents in the Synthesis of Heterocyclic Compounds, in Reviews and Accounts on Heterocyclic Chemistry, O. A. Attanasi, P. Merino, D. Spinelli (Eds.), Targets Heterocycl. Syst. 2019, 23, 27-52.

6. Ligand based 19F NMR Methods with Selective Pulses to Probe Small-Molecule Protien Interaction

Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Rajasthan

Samanwita Pal, PI (2017-20)

Project Description:

Analysis and quantification of ligand-protein interaction draws major attention in the field of biomedicine, agrochemicals to name a few. In the recent past solution state Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) has emerged as one of the most powerful method for understanding the impact of various small to intermediate sized ligands on protein structure and function. The project aims to investigate ligand-protein interactions using solution-state multinuclear 1D Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy as a major technique complemented by fluorescence quenching studies, molecular docking, and Isothermal Titration Calorimetry (ITC), whenever required. Figure 1 represents the graphical illustration of one of the objective. Three different problems are being addressed under this umbrella. Organophosphate-protein interaction using 1H NMR, Organoflurine-protein interaction employing 19F NMR and small molecule-Humic acid interaction analysis employing multinuclear NMR methods based on relaxation, diffusion and Saturation Transfer Difference.

Publications:

    Vandana, Chaubey, B., Dhaharwal, A. K., & Pal, S., Solvent-dependent binding interactions of the organophosphate pesticide, chlorpyrifos (CPF), and its metabolite, 3,5,6- trichloro-2-pyridinol (TCPy), with Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA): A comparative fluorescence quenching analysis. Pesticide Biochemistry and Physiology, Elsevier, 2017,139, 92-100.
    Dahiya, V., & Pal, S. The effect of paracetamol on 5 fluorouracil and bovine serum albumin interaction: A biophysical study. AIP Conference Proceedings.2018,1953(1), 140012.
    Chaubey, B., & Pal, S. Binding Interaction of Organofluorine−Serum Albumin: A Comparative Ligand-Detected 19F NMR Analysis. Journal of Physical Chemistry B., 2018 122(40), , 9409−9418.
    Salian, S. R., Nayak, G., Kumari, S., Patel, S., Gowda, S., Shenoy, Y., Sugunan, S., GK, R., Managuli, R., Mutalik. S., Dahiya, V, Pal, S., Adiga, S. & K. Guruprasad. Supplementation of biotin to sperm preparation medium enhances fertilizing ability of spermatozoa and improves preimplantation embryo development. Journal of Assisted Reproduction and Genetics, Springer, 2018, ISSN: 1058-0468., https://doi.org/10.1007/s10815-018-1323-1.
    Chaubey, B., & Pal, S. Hexaflumuron_β-Cyclodextrin Inclusion Complex as Improved Pesticide Formulation: A NMR Case Study. AIP Conference Proceedings,2019, 2142 (1), 180003.

7. Development of Electrochemical Energy Storage from Carbon Rich Waste

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Ritu Gupta, PI and Rakesh K. Sharma, Co-PI (2017-20)

Project Description:

The disposal of waste organic materials such as polymers is a serious problem to natural ecosystems as some of them can be non-biodegradable and potentially toxic.The recycling of waste material can largely help to address environmental problem however recycling is limited due to lack of infrastructure, facilities for recycling and complexity involved.Several methods have been developed for the recycling of polymers such as polyesters, polyethylene and polypropylene.During recycling, the well-defined hydrocarbons (CnH2n) that are generated could be used directly to produce carbon nanomaterials. Carbon is one of the stable form of material that is utilized extensively as electrode material for energy storage devices. Porous carbons suchas activated carbon, carbon nanotubes and graphene are used exclusively as the active electrode materials in electric double layer capacitors (EDLCs). The performance of EDLCs depend on surface area and electrical conductivityof the graphitic carbon which is produced.The high porosity of carbon based nanomaterials is conventionally coupled to poor electrical conductivity that increases with addition of conductive fillers and binders. This by far has prevented the commercialization of these materials as active electrodes in EDLCs. In this project, we propose to develop a cost effective process for synthesis of carbon based materials from waste polymeric sources for the fabrication of electrodes for supercapacitors.

Publications:

    Bahuguna, G; Choudhary, S; Sharma, R. K.; Gupta, R.* Electrophilic Fluorination of Graphitic Activated Carbon for Enhancement in Electric Double Layer Capacitance Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1900667.
    Bahuguna, G. Ram, P.; Sharma, R. K. and Gupta, R.* An Organo-fluorine Compound Mixed Electrolyte for Ultrafast Electric Double Layer Supercapacitors ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 2767.

8. Solid State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Assessment of Zinc Oxide (ZnO) Nanomaterial Based Drug Delivery Systems

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Samanwita Pal, PI (2017-20)

Project Description:

The project aims to apply various one and two dimensional solid state NMR experiments to characterize molecular interaction of bare and surface functionalized ZnO nanomaterials with some anticancer drugs and amino acids. Established literature methods are used to synthesize ZnO nanoparticle and nanorods along with drug loading and adsorption of amino acids. Multinuclear solid state NMR experiments are used to understand drug dynamics and mechanism of adsorption. In the project, a set of ZnO nanomaterials have been synthesized and characterized following established literature methods. Further, the materials are used for surface functionalization with small anti-cancer drug and amino acid. Solid state CPMAS NMR experiments are carried out to analyse the effect of surface adsorption on the small drug molecules. A series of solid state relaxation measurements are also undertaken to understand the modification in dynamic regime due to adsorption.

Publications:

    Kumar, D., & Pal, S.Optical Band Gap and Crystallite Size Investigations of Anticancer Drug Loaded ZnO.. AIP Conference Proceedings 2142 (1), 2019, 180004. 

9. New Single Source Precursors for Potential Nanostructured Bi2Te3/sb2Te3 System Based Thermoelectric Materials

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Ramesh K.Matre, PI (2017-20)

Project Description:

Group V/VI materials of the type V2VI3 such as antimony and bismuth telluride (Sb2Te3, Bi2Te3) are narrow band-gap layered semiconductors are attracting intense interest in the recent years due to their potential applications as superior thermoelectric materials at ambient temperature range. single source precursors approaches in presence of non-aqueous solution to synthesize nanostructures seems advantageous as it provide better control over particle size and morphology and thereby expected to improve overall properties.In this project, functionalized tellurium centered ligands will be synthesized using intramolecular coordination strategy while some of the ligands will be synthesized utilizing bulky organic substituent. These ligands will be reacted with appropriate starting metal precursor to synthesize various coordination complexes of p block elements such as Bi, Sb and Sn. It is expected that a library of coordination complexes will be formed and in all the case structure and nuclearity of the final product will be governed by the reaction conditions and type of the starting reactant used. In each case systematic characterization of all the complexes will be carried out. While NMR ESIMS, IR spectroscopy will be used to characterize the ligands, structural characterization of the complexes will be carried out by Single crystal X-ray diffraction. All the complexes will also be investigated by DSC and TGA/DTA (thermal properties) techniques. All the complexes will be converted into nanostructured materials via solution phase decomposition method. Nanostructured materials will be further characterized by SEM, TEM, EDX and PXRD techniques. In addition, their thermoelectric properties will be investigated in collaboration. It is anticipated that these nanostructured materials will show interesting thermoelectric properties.

Publications:

    A. Mishra, A. Betal, N. Pal, R. Kumar, P. Lama, S. Sahu, R. K. Metre Molecular Memory Switching Device Based on a Tetranuclear Organotin Sulfide Cage [(RSnIV)4(μ-S)6]·2CHCl3·4H2O (R = 2-(Phenylazo)phenyl): Synthesis, Structure, DFT Studies, and Memristive Behavior, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater. 2020, 2, 1, 220-229

10. Catalytic Upgrading of Bio-Oil (Algae-Oil) to Transport Fuel

Department of Biotechnology, Government of India

Rakesh Kumar Sharma, PI (2014-20)

Project Description:

The proposal aims to develop new and improved heterogeneous catalytic systems for conversion of algal/non-edible/pyrolysis oil to transport fuel and value-added products via hydrodeoxygenation (HDO), Hydrodecarbonyltaion, decarboxylation and hydrogenation processes. The heterogeneous catalytic systems based on d8 & d9 metals nanoparticles supported on clay and silica-alumina is developed.

Scale-up and recycling of catalyst and catalytic at kilogram has also been successfully carried out. The catalyst could be recycled up 50 cycles with>99 % hydrocarbon selectivity and < 1 ppm metal leaching. The project discovers best sulphide free non-noble metals catalyst that can work at ~250 oC and 5 bar pressure to develop diesel grade bio-fuel from biomass. Clay catalyzed hydrogenation of squalene to squalane (emollient used in cosmetics) with 99.999% purity (best ever) is also a major achievement.


Publications:

    Metal Nanoparticles Intercalated Clay for Solvent Free Hydrogenation of Squalene into Squalane : Indian Pat. Appl. (2018), IN 201611009866 A 20180126 
    Metal(s)/clay Catalysts for Converting Biomass into Diesel Grade Hydrocarbons: Indian Pat. Appl. (2019), IN 201711025555 A 20190125 
    Metal Nanoparticles Doped Hollow Carbon Nanobubbles and Preparation Method thereof 201911017622 Application Date 2-May-2019
    A Hydrogen-Annealed Bimetallic Oxide and Implementations Thereof 201911031662 Application Date 5-August-2019
    Laishram, D., Shejale, K.P., Krishnapriya, R., Sharma, R.K., (2020) Nitrogen-Enriched Carbon Nanobubbles and Nanospheres for Applications in Energy Harvesting, Storage, and CO2 Sequestration, ACS Applied Nano Materials, (American Chemical Society)Vol. 3, pp 3706-3716
    Krishanpriya,R., Gupta,U., Soni,V.K., and Sharma,R.K., (2020), “Catalytic Conversion of Biomass to Diesel Grade Hydrocarbon: Impact of Cobalt (II,III) oxide Integration in SiO2-Al2O3, Sustainable Energy & Fuels, (Royal Society of Chemistry), (Accepted; https://doi.org/10.1039/C9SE01221D)
    Soni,V.K., Krishanpriya,R., and Sharma,R.K., (2020), “Highly Selective Co3O4/Silica-Alumina Catalytic System for Deoxygenation of Triglyceride-based Feedstock, Fuel, Vol 266, pp 117065 (Elsevier)
    Sharma,P., Solanki M. and Sharma,R.K., (2019), “Metal Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes for Biomass Conversion: Base-Free highly Efficient and Recyclable Catalysts for Aerobic Oxidation of 5-Hydroxymethylfurfural”. New Journal of Chemistry, (Royal Society of Chemistry), Vol. 43, pp 10601-10609
    Soni,V.K., Roy,T., Dhara,S., Choudhary,G., Sharma,P.R., Sharma,R.K., (2018), On the investigation of acid and surfactant modification of natural clay for photocatalytic water remediation, Journal Material Science, (Springer), Vol. 53 pp 10095-10110.
    Devika,L., Shejale,K.P., Gupta,R., and and Sharma,R.K., (2018), “Solution Processed Hafnia Nanoaggregates: Influence of Surface Oxygen on Catalytic Soot Oxidation,” ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, (American Chemical Society) Vol. 6, pp 11286-11294
    Soni,V.K., Sharma,P.R., Choudhary,G., Pandey,S., and Sharma,R.K., (2017), “Ni/Co-Natural Clay as Green Catalysts for Microalgae Oil to Diesel-Grade Hydrocarbons Conversion, ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, (American Chemical Society), Vol.5, pp 5351-5359
    Soni,V.K., and Sharma,R.K., (2016), “Palladium Nanoparticles Intercalated Montmorillonite Clay: A Green Catalyst for Solvent Free Chemoselective Hydrogenation of Squalene,” ChemCatChem, (Wiley), Vol. 8, pp 1763-1768 (COVER PAGE)

11. Streamlined Total Synthesis of Biologically Active natural Products: Unified Approach to the Potent Indole Diterpeniods

IIT Jodhpur, SEED Grant

Rohan D. Erande, PI (2019-22)

Project Description:

Natural products synthesis is a vibrant research area of the chemistry that plays the major role in human life whereas, natural products as a medicine is one of the important weapons to cure from various diseases. To date, thousands of natural products and their synthetic analogs are presents in the market to treat either independent or combined with the various types of targeted diseases. Though, many of diseases increasingly being hampered by the presence of multidrug-resistant parasites in fact some of the diseases are still alive (ex. Cancer). Despite considerable progress in medical research they remain one of the high-ranking causes of the death in the world today. So, new natural products with new mechanism of action that display the required chemical diversity to help combat drug resistance are always required, and to achieve such a targets, it is necessitate to develop new reactions and methods and their applications in the total synthesis of novel biologically active indeed architecturally complex natural products remain constantly demanding. So, we take this opportunity to develop a unified approach towards advances and applications in the total synthesis of numerous biologically active indole diterpenoids.

12. Pincer Ligand based Transition Metal Catalysts Design for Carbon dioxide activation and catalytic utilization

IIT Jodhpur, SEED Grant

Subrata Chakroborty, PI (2019-22)

Project Description:

The ongoing project is exploring the possibility of designing novel pincer transition metal catalysts in combination of Lewis acid moieties and their potential to exploit industrially important and catalytically challenging high-value chemical transformations under mild conditions utilizing potent greenhouse gas CO2 as a raw material.

13.Modelling Organic and Biochemical Phenomena via Direct Chemical Dynamics Simulations Core Research Grant,

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Manikandan P., PI (2020-23)

Project Description:

In this project, state-of-the-art direct dynamics methodology along with appropriate electronic structure theory will be used to investigate important and interesting chemical phenomena. Two different problems will be addressed: (a) mechanisms of covalent adduct formation between DNA base pairs with few select carcinogens, and (b) chemistry of negatively charged arenes. An atomic level dynamics investigation of covalent adduct formation between DNA bases and a few select carcinogenic molecules will be undertaken. The results from these simulations are expected to provide a detailed atomic level mechanistic information about DNA adduct formation useful in drug designing.

14. Thermodynamic Origin and Stability of Asymmetric Bilayers Core Research Grant,

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Ananya Debnath, PI (2020-23)

Project Description:

The naturally existing bilayers are mostly asymmetric in nature and act as a selective barrier for the passage of extracellular fluids or ions within the cell. The difference in compositions across two leaflets results in asymmetric inhomogeneous bilayers. These are vital for a number of metabolic phenomena such as thrombosis, phagocytois etc. We aim to understand the origin and stability of asymmetry in biological membranes using multi-scale modeling.

Some of the prominent on-going Sponsored Research Projects include:
1. A Game-theoretic perspective of Quantum Information Processing

PI: Atul Kumar

Project Description:

Game theory is an eminently interesting and flourishing field of study, wherein many situations of conflicts can be efficiently examined and resolved. With the advent of quantum information and computation, the quest to analyze classical game theory in quantum realm received significant interest not only to investigate the foundational aspects of quantum theory but also to inspect conditions where quantum strategies can be beneficial in comparison to classical strategies. The central idea to study and analyze quantum strategies as opposed to classical strategies is to achieve a better payoff or reward well within the settings of a game. The advantages using quantum strategies in a game theoretic framework are mainly attributed to quantum entanglement and nonlocal correlations present in the shared quantum resource. In fact, Bell and Bell-type inequalities- whose violation confirms the presence of nonlocal correlations in a quantum system- have a very strong connection with game theory. The basic framework of the Bell inequality based on locality and realism can be formulated in the game-theoretic realm using the CHSH (Clauser-Horne-Simony-Holt) game. Further the element of incompleteness, present in quantum mechanics and reflected in assumptions of Bell’s inequality, is nicely portrayed as games with partial information; also known as Bayesian games. Moreover, quantum game theory also finds its application in analyzing security, algorithms, quantum key distribution, and quantum communication protocols by representing these concepts as games between different players. Our group is interest in analyzing the role of entanglement and nonlocality in quantum information, computation, and security using different perspectives of quantum game theory.

2. Solution dynamics of amino acids and peptides: Application of NMR relaxation and Dynamic Nuclear Polarization Technique

PI: Samanwita Pal

Project Description:

In this project we aim to understand molecular association and/or higher order structure formation under the influence of co-solute interaction in solution. NMR relaxation at high and low field in conjunction with Dynamic Nuclear Polarization has been employed to address to problems of interest: Self association of amino acids in presence of salts and structural transition of peptides in presence of fluoroalcohols.

Publications:

    Bhagat, S., Hydrophobic Interaction of Alanine in Aqueous Electrolyte Solution: A NMR Spin-Lattice Relaxation Analysis, Master’s Thesis submitted to Dept. of Chemistry, IITJ, 2018
    Chaubey, B., Dey, A., Banerjee, A., Chandrakumar, N. & Pal, S. Assessment of TFE solvent dynamics inducing conformational transitions in Melittin: An approach with solvent 19F low field NMR relaxation and Overhauser DNP studies. Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 2019 (Under Review).

3. Solution state NMR investigation of drug delivery systems: Supramolecular and polymeric DDS

PI: Samanwita Pal

Project Description:

Solution state Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy have been extensively used for the purpose of confirming encapsulation, structural details and stability of inclusion complexes of small drug molecules and supramolecular DDS. Similarly polymeric microspheres are also explored for drug encapsulation and consequently have been analysed by NMR in solution state providing knowledge about encapsulation efficiency, release kinetics and stability of encapsulated drugs. In this project, our main objective is to employ 1D selective NMR relaxation methods for analyzing motional dynamics of β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) encapsulated drug molecules. Further, NMR exchange experiments in one dimensional mode has been employed to understand effect of encapsulation on the proton dynamics of uracil molecule in case of polymeric microspheres.

Publications:

    Kumar, D., & Pal, S. Solution Dynamics of 5-Fluorouracil entrapped in Poly Lactic-co-Glycolic Acid (PLGA) microsphere - A study with 1D selective NMR methods. Magnetic Resonance in Chemistry. 57, 2019, 118-128.https://doi.org/10.1002/mrc.4799
    Kumar, D., Krishnan, Y., Paranjothy, M., & Pal, S., Analysis of Molecular Interaction of Drugs within b-Cyclodextrin Cavity by Solution-State NMR Relaxation. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B, ACS, 121(13), 2017, 2864-2872.
    Kumar, D., Krishnan, Y., Paranjothy, M., & Pal, S., Structure and dynamics of cyclodextrin inclusion complexes: Applicability of 1D selective NMR methods. (Communicated to ChemPhysChem)

4. Coupling between water and membrane dynamics

PI: Ananya Debnath

Project Description:

Water is the most abundant molecule in cells. Water molecules near membranes affect several biological processes such as transport of drugs and small molecules across the cell, influences formation of membrane rafts, molecular recognition, signal transduction and so on. In the past decade, with a major advancement of computer simulations and experimental techniques, water near bio and soft interfaces are found to have distinct properties with slow relaxations compared to that of the bulk water and these water molecules are termed as biological water. However, dynamics of biological water from membrane experiments remain fragmentary due to the fluidity of membranes at physiological temperature and inaccessible atomistic trajectories. Moreover, the influence of water on global dynamics of membrane or protein are still debated. The hydration water dynamics near lipid membranes are investigated using all atom molecular dynamics simulations. Chemically confined interfacial water and lipid membranes exhibit distinct relaxation rates manifesting dynamical heterogeneity. We aim to find the correlation between relaxation time scales of interface water and hydrogen bonded lipid moieties so that hydration dynamics can act as a sensitive reflector of regional membrane dynamics.


Completed Projects

Faculty Members of the Department have completed the following Sponsored Research Projects:

    Towards The Development Of Low-Cost Water Quality Sensors (Phase-II) Panasonic Rakesh Kumar Sharma, PI 2015
    Slow relaxations of chemically confined water near membranes Ananya Debnath, PI 

The slow relaxations are found to be universal irrespective of the nature of chemical confinement as the underlying source is dynamical heterogeneities at physiological temperature.


Publications:

    Srivastava, A., & Debnath, A. (2018). Hydration dynamics of a lipid membrane: Hydrogen bond networks and lipid-lipid associations. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 148(9), 094901. ISSN: 0021-9606. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5011803
    Srivastava, A., Malik, S., & Debnath, A. (2019). Heterogeneity in structure and dynamics of water near bilayers using TIP3P and TIP4P /2005 water models. Chemical Physics, 525, 110396. ISSN: 0301-0104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemphys.2019.110396
    Srivastava, A., Karmakar, S., & Debnath, A. (2019). Quantification of spatio-temporal scales of dynamical heterogeneity of water near lipid membranes above supercooling. Soft Matter, 15(47), 9805-9815. ISSN: 1744-6848. https://doi.org/10.1039/C9SM01725A


3. Phase transition of surfactants

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Ananya Debnath,PI 2014-16

Surfactants are amphilic molecules which can self-assemble into different macro-aggregates with huge applications in cosmetic industry, oil recovery process, etc. Designing a phase for the self-assembled surfactants is important to target a functionality relevant for industry. We find that water concentration can be a controlling parameter for a micelle to lamellar phase transition using all-atom molecular dynamics (AA-MD) simulations. Using multi-scale modeling we find that trans-bilayer compositional asymmetry can induce a interdigitated gel to ripple phase transition at the same temperature and surfactant to cosurfactant ratio. These phases are particularly important for formulating hair conditioners, hair gels, etc.

Publications:

    Lunkad, R., Srivastava, A., & Debnath, A. (2017). Influence of water concentrations on the phase transformation of a model surfactant /co-surfactant/water system. Chemical Physics, 483–484, 103–111. ISSN: 0301-0104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemphys.2016.11.014
    Srivastava, A., & Debnath, A. (2019). Cylindrical to Spherical Shape transformations of Micelles using All-Atom and Coarse-Grained Molecular Dynamics Simulations, AIP Conference Proceedings, 2142, 130004. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5122512.

4. Role of non-covalent forces in peptide-based soft-materials

Ananya Debnath, PI

Non-covalent forces are responsible for the association of peptidebased hydrogels which are biologically inspired and have applications in material sciences/technology. We focus on understanding the driving forces behind the self-assembled super structures. Integrated information from e lectronic structure calculations and MD simulations provide insights on the preferential building blocks of self-assembled structures and the underlying physical phenomena driving water confinement within hydrogels with bio-medical applications (Sci Rep 2017, Chem Sci 2019, Bul. Mat. Sci. 2020).

Publications:

    Ahmed, S., Pramanik, B., Sankar, K. N. A., Srivastava, A., Singha, N., Dowari, P., Srivastava, A., Mohanta, K., Debnath, A. & Das, D. (2017). Solvent assisted tuning of morphology of a peptide-perylenediimide conjugate: helical fibers to nano-rings and their differential semiconductivity. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 9485. ISSN: 2045-2322. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-09730-z
    Singha, N., Srivastava, A., Pramanik, B., Ahmed, S., Dowari, P., Chowdhuri, S., Das, B. K., Debnath, A. & Das, D. (2019). Unusual confinement properties of a water insoluble small peptide hydrogel. Chemical Science, 10(23), 5920–5928. ISSN: 2041-6539. https://doi.org/10.1039/C9SC01754B
    Srivastava, A., Garg, A., Das, D. & Debnath, A. (2020). Molecular dynamics simulations of a stacked π–conjugated soft material: binding energy and preferential geometry for self-assembly, Invited article on Bulletin of Materials Science for the Thematic issue on Soft Materials, in press.

5. Chemical Dynamics Simulations of Complex Organic Reactions: Mechanistic Insights and Microsolvation Effects

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Manikandan Paranjothy, PI 2014-17

Publications:

    Y. Krishnan, N. Sharma, U. Lourderaj, and M Paranjothy, Classical Dynamics Simulations of Dissociation of Protonated Tryptophan in the Gas Phase, J. Phys. Chem. A 121, 4389, 2017.
    Y. Krishnan, A. Vincent, and M. Paranjothy, Classical Dynamics Simulations of Interstellar Glycine Formation via CH2=NH + CO + H2O Reaction, J. Chem. Sci. 129, 1571, 2017.
    S. Godara, P. Verma, and M. Paranjothy, Dissociation chemistry of 3-Oxetanone in the gas phase, J. Phys. Chem. A 121, 6679, 2017.

6. Solid State High Energy Density Lithium Ion Rechargeable Batteries

Indo-Portuguese Research Cooperation in Science & Technology

Rakesh Kumar Sharma, PI 2014-17

The project is towards the development of fast charging and high energy density Li-ion rechargeable batteries, where IIT Jodhpur and the University of Minho, Portugal together developed efficient cathode materials, polymer separators stable at higher voltages (> 5 volts). The cathode materials are prepared via surface modification and doping lanthanides in LMO, and the separator is produced as porous membranes based on polar polymers. Based on performance, coil cells are fabricated and characterization for various field applications.


Publications:

    Ram,P., Patel, H., Singhal,R., Choudhary,G. and Sharma,R.K., (2019), “On the study of mixing and drying on electrochemical performance of spinel LiMn2O4 cathodes, Journal of Renewable and Sustainable Energy,( The American Institute of Physics),Vol. 11(1), pp 014104/1-014104/7
    Ram,P., Singhal,R., and Sharma,R.K., (2017), “Preliminary study of dysprosium doped LiMn2O4 spinel cathode materials, Materials Today Proceedings,(Elsevier),Vol. 4, pp 9365-9370
    Ram,P., Singhal,R., Choudhary,G., and Sharma,R.K., (2017), “On the key role of Dy3 + in spinel LiMn2O4 cathodes for Li-ion rechargeable batteries, Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, ( Elsevier), Vol. 802, pp 91-99
    Ram,P., Goren,A., Ferdov,S., Silva,M.M., Singhal,R., Costa,C.M., Sharma,R.K., and Lanceros-Mendez, S., (2017), “Synthesis and improved electrochemical performance of LiMn2xGdxO4 based cathodes, Solid State Ionics, (Elsevier), Vol. 300, pp 18-25
    Pura,R., Ferdov,S., Silva,M.M., Singhal,R., Costa,C.M., Sharma,R.K. and Lanceros-Mendez,S., (2016), “Improved performance of rare earth doped LiMn2O4 cathodes for lithium-ion battery applications,” New Journal of Chemistry, (Royal Society of Chemistry), 40, pp 6244-6252
    Ram,P., Sharma,R.K., and Singhal,R., (2014), “Synthesis, Physical and Impedance Spectroscopy of Tb(III) Doped LiMn2O4 Cathode Material for Lithium Ion Rechargeable Batteries,” Journal of Advanced Electrochemistry, (American Scientific Publishers) Vol.2, pp 46-49

7. Towards The Development Of Low-Cost Water Quality Sensors (Phase-I) Panasonic

Rakesh Kumar Sharma, PI 2014

8. Generation, Storage and Distribution of Solar Hydrogen

Department of Science & Technology (DST), Government of India

Rakesh Kumar Sharma, PI 2012-14

In this project, we have developed surfactant-free facile synthesis method for titania (TiO2) nanostructures, by which morphology and phase can be tuned through temperature variation. The formation of oval-shaped nanocrystals and nanorods at different temperatures are attributed to the phase transformation between anatase and rutile by a one-step chemical reaction process involving titanium tetraisopropoxide and aqueous ethyl alcohol. Categorically, two different morphologies of TiO2 were observed with respect to variation in temperature with nanorods formation at -20 °C and -10 °C and oval shape formation at -40 oC, -30 oC and 0 oC. Crystalline nature and size of TiO2 nanoparticles were determined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD). The energy gap of TiO2 nanoparticles was determined by optical absorption measurement and found to be in the range of ~ 2.92 to 3.02 eV with an indirect band nature. Additionally, we have developed highly efficient visible light M/MO/ABX3/CdS nano-composites for photocatalytic hydrogen production via water splitting (M= d and f-block elements; 259 examples) under sunlight.

Publications:

    Kiran P Shejale, Devika Laishram, Rakesh K Sharma and Arun Kumar Photocatalytic Nanocomposite and Applications Thereof: 201911008783 Application Date 6-March-2020
    Shejale,K.P., Laishram,D., and Sharma,R.K., (2018), “Engineered ZnO-TiO2 Nanospheres for High Performing Membrane Assimilated Photocatalytic Water Remediation and Energy Harvesting,” ChemistrySelect (Wiley), 3, pp 7291-7301
    Devika,L., Shejale,K.P., Gupta,R., and Sharma,R.K., (2018), “Heterostructured HfO2/TiO2 Nano-Spheroids for Visible Photocatalytic Water Remediation,” Material Letters, (Elsevier) 231, pp 225-228
    Shejale,K.P., Laishram,D., Gupta,R., and Sharma,R.K., (2017), “Zinc Oxide-Titania Heterojunction-based Solid Nanospheres as Photoanodes for Electron-Trapping in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Energy Technology, (Wiley), Vol. 5, pp 489-494
    Laishram,D.,Shejale,K.P., Sharma,R.K., and Gupta,R., (2016), “HfO2 Nanodots Incorporated in TiO2 and its hydrogenation for High Performance Dye Sensitized Solar Cells, RSC Advances, (Royal Society of Chemistry), 6, pp 78768-78773
    Shejale,K.P., Laishram,D., and Sharma,R.K., (2016), “High-performance dye-sensitized solar cell using dimensionally controlled titania synthesized at sub-zero temperatures,” RSC Advances, (Royal Society of Chemistry), 6, pp 23459-23466
    Shejale,K.P., Laishram,D., Roy,M.S., Kumar,M., and Sharma,R.K., (2016), “On the study of phase and dimensionally controlled titania nanostructures synthesis at sub-zero temperatures, Materials & Design, (Elsevier), Vol. 92, pp 535-540

9. Asymmetric Hydrogenation on Carbon Nanotube Surface DST- RFBR, Indo - Russian Bilateral Project

Rakesh Kumar Sharma, PI 2012-14

In this project, we have developed highly selective novel heterogeneous nanocatalytic systems based on carbon materials and polymers. Out of various carbon-supported metals, the cinchona/Pt/MWCNTs is found to be most efficient system and provides high enantioselectivity (ee > 99.9 %) due to the high absorption of cinchona and atomically dispersed Pt nanoparticles that maximize metal utilization. Substrate-modifier interaction is examined by time dependent NMR studies. During this study, the excellent activity of Pt (111) plane is observed due to higher packing density, stability and cohesive energy than other crystal planes, leading to significant chemisorption of a variety of chemical entities. For that, a strategy is developed that involves the preparation of Pt (111) from phase transfer reagent Tw20, followed by mixing of functionalized carbon materials to obtain heterogeneous Pt (111) hexagonal nanocrystal loaded carbon catalyst, by simple thermolytic reduction in air, which are tested for asymmetric hydrogenation of α-ketoester at ambient reaction conditions, using cinchonine as a modifier. Chiral polymers are prepared and used as tunable supports, it is found that the chirality could be transferred from the support to substrate with ease in case of hydrogenation of carbonyl groups.

Publications:

    Sharma,P., and Sharma,R.K., (2019), “Electrophilic [N-F]+ Catalysed Asymmetric Allylation of (E)-N, 1-diphenylmethanimine”, Chirality, (Wiley),Vol. 31, pp 91-96
    Nunes-Pereiraa,J., Sharma,P., Fernandes,L.C., Oliveira,J., Moreira,J.A., Sharma,R.K., and Lanceros-Mendez,S., (2018), “Poly(vinylidene fluoride) composites with carbon nanotubes decorated with metal nanoparticles,” Composites, Part B: Engineering, (Elsevier), 142, pp 1-8.
    Sharma,P., and Sharma,R.K., (2018), “Platinum/Graphene as Recyclable Catalyst for Asymmetric Hydrogenation of alpha-ketoesters,” Catalysis in Green Chemistry and Engineering, (Begell House), Vol. 1, pp 43-50, DOI: 10.1615/.2017020858
    Sharma,P., and Sharma,R.K., (2017), “Platinum functionalized Chiral Polyamides: Efficient Heterogeneous Catalyst for Solvent Free Asymmetric Hydrogenation of Ethyl 2-oxo-4-phenylbutanoate, ChemistrySelect, (Wiley), Vol. 2, pp 513-520
    Sharma,P., and Sharma,R.K., (2016), “Asymmetric Hydrogenation of ketoesters on Pt(111) Surface, New Journal of Chemistry, (Royal Society of Chemistry), 40, pp 9038-9041
    Sharma,P., and Sharma,R.K., (2015), “Platinum functionalized multiwall carbon nanotube composites as recyclable catalyst for highly efficient asymmetric hydrogenation of methyl pyruvate,” RSC Advances, (Royal Society of Chemistry), 5, pp 102481-102487
    Sharma,P., and Sharma,R.K., (2015), “Comparative study of Pt loaded carbon support catalysis in hydrogenation reaction,” Chemical Engineering and Chemical Processes, (Global Science and Technology Forum), Vol.5, pp 99-103

10. Molecular Sensors: Synthesis and Anion Recognition Studies

Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

Rakesh Kumar Sharma, PI 2012-15

In this project new calix and cucurbit based supramolecular colourimetric sensors for selective recognition of toxic aquatic anions. Approximately 30 odd sensors were developed and they are selective towards ~20 anions including inorganic, organic drugs and vitamins. The arsenic, fluoride and ascorbate are few that give sharp colour changes.

Publications:

    Nunes-Pereiraa,J., Lima,R., Choudhary,G., Sharma,P.R., Ferdov,S., Botelho,G., Sharma,R.K., and Lanceros-Mendez,S., (2018), “Highly efficient removal of fluoride from aqueous media through polymer composite membranes,” Separation and Purification Technology, (Elsevier), Vol. 205 pp 1-10
    Sharma,P.R.; Soni,V.K., Pandey,S., Choudhary,G., Plappally,A.K., and Sharma,R.K., (2017), “Dipicrylhydrazine: A versatile visual anions sensor, Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering, (Elsevier), Vol. 5, pp 2232-2239
    Pandey,S., Soni,V.K., Choudhary,G., Sharma,P.R., and Sharma,R.K., (2017), “Understanding Behavior of Vitamin-C Guest Binding with the Cucurbit[6]uril Host, Supramolecular Chemistry, (Taylor and Francis), Vol. 29, pp 387-394
    Sharma,P., Choudhary,G., Satankar,R., Plappally,A.K., Sharma,R.K., (2015), “Development of Low Cost Polycalixarene-Clay Based Water Guards,” IWW, (Ministry of Water Resources, GoI), Vol.3, pp 91-99
    Choudhary,G., Sharma,R.K., and Plappally,A.K., (2015), ”Local Material composite sintered systems for fluoride removal,” Desalination and Water Treatment, (Taylor and Francis), Vol.10, pp 2626-2637


Collaborations

Faculty Members of the Department of Chemistry are keen to collaborate with individuals from academia, R&D laboratories and industry in India and abroad, in areas of mutual interest. These collaborations include:

    Teaching Activities (authoring books and review articles)
    Organising National and International Visits for undertaking Short Courses and Research Work
    Joint-MOUs for Degree Programs, Research facilities etc.
    Undertaking Research Projects and other research activities
    Developing technologies through Consultancy Projects with Industries 

The Department of Chemistry, IIT Jodhpur is in collaboration with industrial partners as well as top universities in India and internationally.

Besides the academic program and research work, we also carry out instrumental measurements, chemical analysis, research training and consultancy work for industrial, academic, other research organizations as well as with individuals expressing such an interest. Our technical staff team is well-trained, experienced, skilled and capable of dealing with diverse analytical and chemical characterization tools. We, therefore, invite all who are interested in our work and potential cooperation to contact us for further information and details.


News and Newsletter

Sr. No. 	Description
1 	Samapika Sahu, a research scholar under the supervision of Prof. Ananya Debnath, has been awarded Third Prize in the Chemical Sciences category at the SARANSH Thesis Competition
2 	Congratulations to Dr Sandip Murarka for receiving the CRSI Bronze Medal
3 	Congratulations to Dr Sandip Murarka on his appointment as an Associate Editor of RSC Advances, a prestigious journal published by the Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC).
4 	Congratulations to Dr. Sandip Murarka for receiving the prestigious 'Humboldt Research Fellowship for Experienced Researchers'
5 	Dr. Sudhir Kumar Hota Receives the NOST–Anthem Biosciences Best Thesis Award 2025
6 	Congratulations to Dr. Sandip Murarka for CRSI Bronze Medal
7 	List of Provisionally Selected & Waitlisted Candidates for PhD Admission (AY 2025-26 Semester I)
8 	List of Candidates Provisionally Shortlisted for Ph.D Interview (AY 2025-26 Semester I)
9 	Reporting Details for Ph.D Interview (AY 2025-26 Semester I)
10 	PhD Admission Open July 2025
11 	Dr. Sandip Murarka has been invited to join the Early Career Advisory Board of Chemistry-An Asian Journal from 2024.
12 	Congratulations to Dr. Sandip Murarka for receiving the prestigious 'Merck Young Scientist Award (Runner-Up)-2023' (MYSA-2023)
13 	Navigating PhD and Beyond, IIT Jodhpur- A dynamic event organized by IIT Jodhpur in collaboration with ACS.
14 	Samapika has won the BPS Travel Award 2025 to attend the Biophysical Society Meeting
15 	Sunita, a PhD research scholar working under the supervision of Dr. Ramesh K. Metre, is awarded "Best Poster Prize" in the conference, 


Welcome To The Department of Chemical Engineering
Translation of molecular information into discovery of new products and processes with Industry 4.0+ 
Vision & Mission of the Department

To become a globally recognized department of chemical engineering through its contribution in emerging and demand-driven areas with multidisciplinary approach.   

The Department of Chemical Engineering offers under-graduate (B.Tech.) and post-graduate (M.Tech., M.Tech.-Ph.D. and Ph.D.) programs in chemical engineering. Through the academic programs, the department is making a conscious effort to establish itself as a leading institute in the new genre of chemical engineering education. The program involves traditional courses, emerging areas and specialisations such as process engineering intelligence, molecular engineering and sustainability.

In line with the new education policy, B.Tech. (Chemical Engineering) students will have unique opportunity and flexibility for:

    Minor in (a)Management (b)Entrepreneurship (c)Data Science
    Five year B.Tech.+M.Tech./ MBA
    One year Engineering Innovation opportunity


Traditionally, chemical engineering teaching focuses on subjects like material and energy balance, transport phenomena, thermodynamics, mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid mechanics, chemical reaction engineering, numerical analysis, computational systems, biotechnology, petroleum-petrochemicals, polymers and safety engineering. With the advent of the era of Industry 4.0 in chemical companies, artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), data analytics, internet of things (IoT), molecular engineering, nano-composites; the discipline is being transformed by the incorporation of new emerging technologies and demand-driven areas.

The department is keen on collaboration with industry and academia worldwide. At present, Chemical Engineering Department is sharing its expertise with the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS), Ministry of Jal Shakti; Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), Ministry of Defence; International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) etc. Department has signed MoU with the industries for providing consultancy services. Department is also actively involved in Scientific Social Responsibility (SSR) through Unnat Bharat Abhiyan (UBA) and other societal initiatives.

Department has research interest in core and emerging areas; and is looking for faculty members in different areas of chemical engineering. Prospective candidates are encouraged to visit our recruitment page and apply.


Latest News

Sr. No. 	Description
1 	Provisionally Selected Candidates for the PhD Program (January 2026 Session)
2 	Selected Candidates for the Interview and Written Exam for Admission to the PhD Program (January 2026 Session)
3 	Workshop: Open source molecular visualization techniques for researchers
4 	An e-Short Term Course on Applied Numerical Analysis with MATLAB: Theory & Hands-on Practice (Online mode)
5 	Admission to Ph.D. Program for Autumn, 2025-26
6 	Admission to M.Tech. Program 2025-26
7 	PhD Admissions Result AY 24-25 Sem - II
8 	List of candidates shortlisted for interview for admission to PH.D. Program, 2024-25, Sem-II
9 	PhD admission to Department of Chemical Engineering for session- Spring, AY 2024-25
10 	The Joint Admission Test for Masters ( JAM ) 2025
11 	Spot PG Admission for M.Tech/Ph.D./M.Tech-PhD. program 


Undergraduate Program

Bachelor of Technology Programs:

    B. Tech. in Chemical Engineering
    Double B.Tech. in Chemical Engineering and Engineering Science

Engineering disciplines have become increasingly interdisciplinary in nature and Chemical Engineering is not an exception to that. The flexibility of opting for different specialization is ingrained in formulating the structure and curriculum of the Chemical Engineering program. Traditionally, Chemical Engineering teaching is focused on transport phenomena, chemical engineering thermodynamics, mass transfer, fluid mechanics, heat transfer, chemical kinetics, computational systems, and process control. With the advent of the era of Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML), Molecular Engineering, Industry 4.0 in Chemical Plants; the discipline is being transformed by the incorporation of new emerging technologies. Through this Under-Graduate (UG) program in Chemical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur is making a conscious effort to divulge from the traditional path and planning to establish itself to become a leading institute in this new genre of Chemical Engineering education, which includes foundational courses, fundamental courses in chemical engineering, emerging areas in chemical engineering, and sustainability aspects for chemical engineers.

The undergraduate program begins with students pursuing a common foundation in mathematics, physics, chemistry, engineering sciences, engineering design, and programming.

Students are expected to build on these foundations with a concentration on core chemical engineering subjects ranging from material and energy balance, process control, chemical engineering thermodynamics to chemical reaction engineering. Core courses are followed by a set of departmental electives that enable students to target their degree program towards in-depth knowledge of areas matching their specific interests.

The program ensures that the design experience, which includes both analytical studies and experiments, is integrated throughout the curriculum in a structured manner leading to advanced work.

Students can tailor their focus areas in consultation with a faculty advisor. Students can choose their departmental electives (streams) from the following areas:

    Chemical Engineering Design
    Process Engineering Intelligence
    Molecular Engineering
    Sustainability
    Complex Fluids & Interfacial Engineering
    Biochemical Engineering

Program Objective & Attributes

The key objectives of the program are:

    Enable students to have fundamental understanding of the core concepts of Chemical Engineering
    Offer opportunities for specialization in emerging and multidisciplinary areas including Molecular Engineering, Data Science and AI applications, Polymer Engineering, Sustainability, Biochemical Engineering and Complex Fluids & Interfacial Engineering
    Empower students with emerging concepts for plant design in context of chemical engineering via courses designed with AI, ML, and Industry 4.0 applications
    Integrate analytical and computational ability with experimental skills to create individuals competent in professional engineering practices in the domain of Chemical
    Inculcate an attitude towards commitment to engineering ethics, leadership qualities, entrepreneurship and professional development.


Learning Outcomes

Graduates of the B.Tech. program in Chemical Engineering will:

    Gain a strong understanding of mathematics, science and engineering fundamentals of Chemical engineering including the concepts of material and energy balance; computational methods; transport phenomena; reaction engineering; mass transfer; thermodynamics; heat transfer; fluid mechanics and process control
    Have the ability to design a process equipment or plant to meet desired requirements under socio-economic and environmental constraints.
    Be equipped with knowledge of emerging domains: (i) Data Science & AI applications; (ii) Molecular Engineering.
    Have technical capability for addressing sustainability issues related to water, energy and environment.
    Receive effective hands-on laboratory training as a part of laboratory courses and short-term research projects, and be able to design and conduct experiments as well as to analyse and interpret data.
    Develop their communication skills by participating in classroom presentations, entrepreneurial events, seminars and workshops.

Postgraduate Program 

The Department of Chemical Engineering offers the following postgraduate programs:

    Master of Technology Program:  M.Tech. in Chemical Engineering
    Master of Technology-Doctor of Philosophy Dual Degree Program: M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree in Chemical Engineering

Through the M.Tech. and M.Tech-Ph.D. programs in Chemical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur is making a conscious effort to divulge from the traditional path and planning to establish itself to become a leading institute in this new genre of Chemical Engineering education. The program involves a mix of traditional courses followed by electives to specialize in the three chosen areas;

i) Industry 4.0+Data Analytics;

ii) Reaction Engineering;

iii) Petroleum and Petrochemicals.

Further, the project component ensures hands-on problem-solving skills to enable solving industrial problems as well as undertake research in the different areas of chosen field.


Program Objective & Attributes

 The graduates of this program will have:

    In-depth knowledge of chemical engineering and critical awareness of emerging areas such as artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), internet of things (IoT) and data analytics in Chemical Engineering including intelligent process optimization and production simulation.
    Analytical and experimental skills required for new processes and new products with 3D printing, chemometrics and Industry 4.0 in chemical companies.
    Strong fundamentals in traditional chemical engineering.
    Ability to do critical and creative thinking, and to conduct independent and original research and scholarship
    Ability to apply existing skills and knowledge to identify and formulate new problems, produce new ideas, approaches or actions
    Ability to teach and express ideas in both written and oral formats


Learning Outcomes

At the end of the program, a student is expected to have:

    Skills for translation of in-depth knowledge of artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), internet of things (IoT), Internet of Cleanliness and data analytics for chemical engineering systems.
    Ability to design and develop new products and new processes with the knowledge of 3D printing, chemometrics and Industry 4.0 in chemical companies including intelligent process optimization and production simulation.
    Ability to statistically characterize and evaluate the performance of process systems.
    Ability to apply the different methods for chemical engineering challenges and advanced research.
    Carry out research work demonstrating scientific problem solving and generate IPR.


Doctoral Program
Doctor of Philosophy Programs: Engineering Sciences

Ph.D. Chemical Engineering

Doctor of Philosophy in Chemical Engineering is focussed in a manner so that research scholar masters the different skills required for the research work, creatively shape and solve the complex problems, translate molecular information into new products and processes, generate new research ideas and IPR. The focus of the doctoral research  would be:

    Translate molecular information to new products and processes with 3D printing and Industry 4.0+
    Generate new research ideas and IPR


Curriculum

The Department of Chemical Engineering offers five degree programs as part of the undergraduate and postgradute curriculum, namely:

    B.Tech Chemical Engineering
    Double B.Tech Chemical Engineering and Engineering science
    M.Tech. Chemical Engineering
    Dual Degree M.Tech-Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering
    Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering

Academic Regulations
1. INTRODUCTION
Academic programmes at Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur are designed to develop the
highest calibre human resource capable of understanding the new patterns of knowledge
creation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science, humanities, social
sciences and engineering. IIT Jodhpur aims to produce quality professionals who would be able
to address profound and wide-ranging societal challenges of the 21st century such as energy,
food, water, housing, mobility, and health. In addition to imparting scientific knowledge, IIT
Jodhpur endeavours to inculcate human qualities of courage, integrity, fairness, humility and
team effort among its graduates through curricular, co-curricular and extra-curricular activities on
campus.
The academic programmes focus on developing a temper for the life long process of learning,
creative thinking and exploring. The postgraduate academic programmes focus on developing
deep understanding of the subject of study coupled with creative inquisitiveness and the ability
to address and solve new problems with free and objective mind.
The academic programmes are based on three tenets of (1) semester system, (2) Credit System
and (3) Relative Grading. These academic programmes are administered by a duly constituted
Academic Committee (AC) through the office of Academics. The AC will be chaired by Dean
(Academics). In the absence of Dean (Academics), Associate Dean (Academics- PG)/Associate
Dean (Academics- UG) will discharge the responsibilities of Dean (Academics).
The Senate of the Institute has formulated a set of guidelines and rules to ensure high standard
of performance as well as for smooth functioning of the academic programmes. Within this
broad set of guidelines, subject to the approval of Senate, different programmes can include
additional academic requirements as deemed necessary for that programme. These academic
programmes are continuously monitored by the Senate and make appropriate modifications/
improvements as and when necessary.
2. ACADEMIC SESSION
The academic session normally runs from the end of July in one year to the middle of July in the
next year. The academic session is divided into three parts: two regular semesters and a summer
term as per the following timelines:
Semester I: From the fourth week of July to the last week of November
Semester II: From the last week of December to the last week of April
Summer Term: From the middle of May to the middle of July.
Excluding the days of the examinations, the total number of days of instruction in a semester is at
least 70.
2.1 Academic Calendar
The academic calendar gives the exact dates of all important events during the Academic
Session, such as orientation, registration, the commencement of classes, adding and dropping of
courses, submission of documents, examinations, submission of grades, project evaluation,
declaration of results, mid-semester recess, and vacation. This calendar is approved by the
Senate.
3. REGISTRATION
a. Registration: Students are required to register for prescribed credits as per the programme, on
the dates specified in the Academic Calendar. If the student does not register by the date of
registration, she/he can register by paying the fine and register before the date of late
registration.
b. Provisional Registration: A fresh student joining the Institute, who is awaiting the final results
of the qualifying examination, is allowed to register provisionally on submission of a certificate
from her/his last Institute stating that she/he has appeared in the final examination of the
qualifying degree. The student is required to submit documents of having passed the qualifying
examination by the last date given in the Academic Calendar for the registration to be
regularized.
c. Late Registration: If the student does not register by the date of late registration as mentioned
in the Academic Calendar, he/she will be deregistered. The appeal against deregistration may be
made to Chairman, Senate through Dean Academics. The Chairman Senate may permit the
continuation of registration on payment of an appropriate fine.
d. Adding and Dropping of Courses: A student may add or drop course(s) with approval of the
Faculty advisor till the last date of registration.
e. Withdrawing from a Course: After the last date of add-drop, a student will have the option of
withdrawing from a course. The last date of course withdrawal will be typically within four weeks
from the beginning of the Semester as specified in the academic calendar. The withdrawn course
will be mentioned in the Student’s grade card with a letter grade ‘W’.
f. Cancellation of Semester Registration: Absence for a period of four or more weeks during a
semester shall result in automatic cancellation of the registration of a student from all the
courses in that semester.
g. Summer course registration: A department may offer summer courses to enable the students
to clear their backlog courses and/or regular credit courses. A course will run during summer
provided a faculty member(s) is available for running the course. The course is offered on
approval of the Dean/ Associate Dean.
4. TEACHING AND EVALUATION
4.1 Teaching
4.1.1 Medium of Instruction
The medium of instruction is English.
4.1.2 Course Structure
All courses have associated credits. Credits of a course is based on the number of contact hours
for lectures, tutorials, and practicals. A student on successful completion of the course with a
passing grade will earn an equivalent number of credits. Based on the required academic
maturity level of students for attending a course, a course is assigned a level. A course can consist
of independent components which can be completed independently. These components are
called fractals. A course is identified by a unique number. Following tables define all parameters
related to the course numbering scheme.

4.1.3 Approval of Courses
The Senate approves each course along with its weight in terms of credits. Only the approved
courses may be offered during any semester/summer term.
4.1.4 List of Courses
The list of courses to be offered in a Program is finalized before the beginning of the semester, by
the Department hosting that Program.
4.1.5 Categories of Courses
Courses offered can be from one of the following categories:
a) Regular course:
A regular course has 14 hours of classroom engagement per credit. A regular course can be under
elective or core/compulsory categories.
Elective courses of 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, or 600, level will run if a minimum of 10 students
register for the course. A 700 or 800 level elective course can run with a minimum of 5 registered
students. A course not running as a regular course may be offered as a self-study course as per
the following section.
b) Self-study Course
A self-study course will be from the list of courses approved by the Senate. The main features of a
self-study course are as follows:
● A student may be allowed to register for an elective course as a self-study course
provided that the course is not running in that semester as a regular course or a student
is not on campus during the course with prior approval of the competent authority.
● A student may also be permitted to register for a core or program compulsory course in
self-study mode provided he/she has failed in it earlier and the course is not being offered
as a regular course during that semester or a student is not on campus during the course
with prior approval of the competent authority.
● Students should apply for a self-study course with the appropriate recommendation of a
Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/interdisciplinary program committee. The final
sanction of a self-study course to a student is made by the Dean (Academics).
● Formal classroom engagement may not be there for a self-study course but laboratory,
design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the
course.
● The Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the
award of letter grade at the end of the semester.
● Not exceeding 10% of the total graded credit can be opted as a self-study course.
● A self-study course will appear with the approved course title on the transcript.
c) Independent Study Course
Independent study enables a student to pursue course credit on an academic topic of interest
under the supervision of a faculty member. The term independent does not mean not involving
an instructor but independent of regular class engagement. Self-discipline and having a sense of
own direction and goals are fundamental requirements of an Independent Study course. A
student having CGPA more than or equal to 6.0 can opt for Independent Study courses with the
recommendation of the Supervising Professor. The main features of an independent-study
course are as follows:
● A student may be permitted to register for a topic of interest as an independent-study
course not exceeding 3 credits in self-study mode at most once during the program. Such
an independent study course will be counted toward open elective requirements of the
program and will appear with the title “Independent Study” on the transcript.
● Students should apply for an independent study course with the appropriate
recommendation of a Course Coordinator and DUGC/DRC/interdisciplinary program
committee. The final sanction of an independent-study course to a student is made by the
Dean (Academics).
● Normally, no formal lectures will be held for an independent study course but laboratory,
design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the
course.
● The course will be arranged, planned and managed by a supervising professor. The
Course Coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the award
of letter grade at the end of the semester.
4.1.6 Conduct of Courses
Each course is conducted by the instructor with the assistance of the required number of tutors,
as needed. The instructor is responsible for conducting the course, evaluating the performance
of students, awarding the grades at the end of the semester, and transmitting the grades as per
Subsection 5.2.
The student shall have access to his/her answer paper(s) of all the written examinations
conducted for a given course, which may be shown to him/her by the instructor(s) concerned.
The instructor must keep all evaluation records in his custody at least for the next six months.
A course approved by the senate of IIT Jodhpur can be conducted through either (i) direct
contact (ii) synchronized remote contact (iii) guided study mode or combination of these. In
direct contact mode, coordinator or instructor will have a face-to-face physical interaction with
the students. Synchronized remote contact mode would require the faculty and/or the students
to be concurrently connected to the class-room interaction via electronic conferencing involving
both audio and video communication. However, there has to be direct interaction between
faculty and students for limited hours (typically 25%) of the stipulated contact hours. In guided
study mode, a faculty would guide a single or a group of students to take up study of an
approved course via self-learning and discussion-oriented contact sessions. This mode can be also
adopted for enabling a student to take up study of a new course, not yet approved by the senate,
under supervision of a faculty. All formal evaluation components applicable to courses being run
through any one of the above-mentioned modes will be conducted under direct physical
supervision of a faculty. All laboratory components of a course requiring use of a specialized
facility will be conducted through direct contact.
4.1.7 Teaching Assignments
The instructors and tutors for all courses to be offered during the semester are allocated by the
Head of the Department hosting the Program. When faculty members of other Departments are
also required to participate in teaching a particular course, the allocation shall be done in
consultation with the Head of that Department.
4.1.8 Auditing of Courses
A student may audit a course in addition to the prescribed academic load requirement with the
permission of Dean (Academics) on the recommendations of the Instructor of the course being
audited and the Faculty Advisor. Under this arrangement, the course will be listed in the Grade
Card of the student.
4.1.9 Attendance Requirements
A student should have full attendance in each course. Unless the student takes leave of absence
for valid reasons, the student has to attend every lecture, tutorial, or lab session. The attendance
records must be made available to the student after every lecture. Even if the student’s
attendance falls below 75%, the student will be allowed to appear for the exams. Students not
meeting the attendance criterion of 75% will be required to score at least C grade to pass a
course. These students would be awarded F grade if their marks are lower than the cut-off for C
grade in a course.
4.2 Evaluation
The performance of students in a course is evaluated continuously, using their interaction in the
classroom, and performances in examinations, the laboratory work (if any), and term-papers and
projects.
The performance of students in a course is evaluated through examinations and on a continuous
basis. The Senate will decide from time to time on the system of tests and examinations in each
subject in each semester.
● Minor 1, Minor 2 and Major examinations are mandatory components of the evaluation of
a regular 14-week long lecture course. The minor examinations shall be of 60 minutes
duration and the major examination of 120 minutes. Fractal courses (less than 3 credits)
must have at least one examination.
● The total weightage of the examination component (three examinations for a 14-week
long course) shall be between 40% to 60% of the total weightage of evaluation measure.
● Evaluation policy has to be known from the first day of the class.
● The continuous evaluation may include but not limited to interaction in the classroom,
quizzes, assignments, tutorials, laboratory work, term papers and projects.
5. GRADING SYSTEM
5.1 Letter Grades
At the end of the semester, a student is awarded a relative letter grade in each course by the
Instructor offering the course considering the performance of the student during the semester
with respect to those of the other students registered in the course. It is proposed that ten
regular letter grades, namely A*, A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D, E and F shall be awarded in each course.
Each letter grade is associated with a numerical equivalent on a 10-point scale shown in Table 5.1.
In addition, there are four special letter grades, namely, I, S, X and U, which stand for Incomplete,
Satisfactory, Thesis Continuation and Unsatisfactory, respectively. The faculty member shall
upload grades on the portal as per stipulated time schedule.

6. GRADE CARD AND TRANSCRIPT
A Grade Card shall be issued to each student at the end of each semester, and a Transcript at the
end of the Programme. IIT Jodhpur Grade Card and Transcript will only indicate the courses,
credits and grades completed at IIT Jodhpur and the total number of credits (without grades)
earned in other academic institutions in a particular semester, if applicable.
7. WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS IN SPECIAL CASES
The rules and regulations procedures and requirements stated in this manual, other than those
related to Admissions to the academic programmes, may be waived in special circumstances by
the AC on the recommendation of the Department with the approval of Chairman, Senate. All
such exceptions have to be reported to the Senate.
8. MAKE-UP EXAMINATIONS
A student who has missed minor(s) or the major examination due to genuine reasons like illness
etc. may be permitted to write a make-up examination for the missed components. The student
should make an application to the Dean (Academics) through the course instructor within ten
days from the date of the missed examination, explaining the reasons for their absence.
Applications received after this period need not be entertained. The permission to take a
make-up examination will be given under exceptional circumstances such as admission to a
hospital due to illness. A student needs to produce the necessary document subject to one of the
following categories:
● Students residing in the Hostels should produce a Medical Certiﬁ
cate issued by the
Medical Oﬃ
cer of the Institute that he/she was admitted in the Hospital during the period
of the missed quiz/exam.
● Students residing in the Hostels and taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are
required to obtain written permission from the Medical Oﬃ
cer of the Institute Hospital
before they proceed for such consultation.
● Students residing in the hostels but taking medical consultation with outside Doctors are
required to obtain an endorsement on the certiﬁ
cate of treatment by the Medical Oﬃ
cer
of the Institute Hospital.
● A student staying outside the Campus permanently / temporarily must produce a medical
certiﬁ
cate from the Registered Medical Practitioner and the same should be duly
endorsed by the parent/guardian.
A slot- wise make-up examination for major will be held during the makeup /
supplementary week as per Academic Calendar of the subsequent semester for those
who are permitted to take the make-up examination. A student who misses this make-up
examination will not normally be given another make-up examination. However, in
exceptional cases of prolonged illness resulting in the student missing a make-up
examination, the Chairman of the Senate, in consultation with the Dean of Academics
may permit the student to appear for make-up examination any day before the end of the
ﬁ
rst week of the next semester. Under no circumstances prorating can be done for the
missed examinations or attendance.
REGULATIONS FOR PG PROGRAMME
9. POSTGRADUATE PROGRAMMES
The Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur currently oﬀ
ers the following Postgraduate
programmes.
1. Master of Science (M.Sc.)
2. Dual degree: M.Sc.-M.Tech.
3. Master of Technology (M.Tech.)
4. Dual degree: M.Tech.-PhD.
5. Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.)
10. POSTGRADUATE ADMISSIONS
The process of admission for all the programs oﬀ
ered by the Institute normally is underway
during April-May for Semester 1 and during November-December for Semester 2. In addition, the
department may process applications for admissions to PhD programs on a continuous basis and
admit students as per the existing procedure.
10.1Categories of Admission
A candidate can be admitted in any one of the following categories
i. Full-time regular
ii. Full-time sponsored
iii. Part-time
iv. External
v. Part-time (online)
vi. Part-time (Project sponsored)
vii. Executive
However, all categories are not applicable for all PG Programs. Further, programmes can be
oﬀ
ered in a combination of these modes (like fully sponsored part-time programs).
i) Full-time Regular
An in campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. A student
supported by a project of the institute will be considered a full-time regular student.
ii) Full-time Sponsored
An in campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. The
candidate is sponsored either by his/her employer or by self. A self-sponsored candidate must
have two years of relevant industrial/R&D/academic experience.
iii) Part-time
A part-time student is a working professional who, while employed, attends regular classes as per
schedule of the Institute. The student must produce an NOC from the employer for pursuing the
programme at IIT Jodhpur. The student can register only for a limited number of credits as
compared to a full-time regular student.
iv) External
A student working in an industry/R&D establishment/academic institution which is equipped with
the necessary research and library facilities. The employer must relieve the student to stay in the
campus to complete the minimum residency requirements.
v) Part-time (online)
A part-time (online) student is a working professional who, while employed, attends classes in a
synchronous audio-visual mode as per the schedule of the Institute including limited contact
sessions. The student is expected to register for a limited number of credits per semester. The
student will need to spend at least 12 months in the campus before submission of the Ph.D thesis
distributed over the entire period of the programme as per the academic requirements. The
student must produce a NOC from the employer for pursuing the programme at IIT Jodhpur
certifying that the employer will also provide access to resources for proper execution of the
research work.
vi) Part-time (Project sponsored)
A part-time candidate is a project student receiving fellowship at least at the MoE stipulated rate
being supported through research projects running in the institute. The student can register only for
a limited number of credits as compared to a full-time regular student. The student is expected to
receive the fellowship for a minimum of 36 months. The student will be paying fees at the same rate
as that of full time GATE Qualified candidates. The Department will process the applications ONLY if
such a position is available in the respective M. Tech. program.
vii) Executive (only for M. Tech.)
A professional who can carry out/complete the programme requirement in
1. An accelerated fashion (minimum in 12 months), OR
2. Accumulates credits as per convenience and petitions a degree in maximum of 6 years.
3. Part-time or full-time mode by attending courses oﬀ
ered in synchronized remote contact
mode and limited direct interaction
10.2 Eligibility for Admission
a. The eligibility conditions given below are the absolute minimum. Departments may
prescribe any requirements over and above, subject to the approval of the Senate.
a. The number of admissions that can be made to any program shall be decided by the
Senate from time to time.
b. Reservation of seats for various reserved categories shall be prescribed by the Board of
Governors.
10.2.1 Admission to M. Sc. Program (Regular)
The admission to the M.Sc. Programs oﬀ
ered by the Institute will be through any one of the
following two avenues.
a) The applicants qualiﬁ
ed through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by
IITs.
b) The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3 or 4 year program)
may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for
SC/ST) category in aggregate or as speciﬁ
ed by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0
for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional
requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4
for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a 
ﬁ
rst class as speciﬁ
ed by the university/institute.
10.2.2 Admission to M.Sc – M.Tech Dual Degree Program (Regular)
The admission to the M. Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree Programs oﬀ
ered by the Institute will be
through any one of the following two avenues.
a) The applicants qualiﬁ
ed through the Joint Admission Test for Master (JAM) organized by
IITs.
b) The applicants having a bachelor’s degree in any relevant discipline (3 or 4 year program)
may be admitted based on written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
The applicants under the category (b) must have a minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for
SC/ST) category in aggregate or as speciﬁ
ed by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0
for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional
requirements when the scales are other than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4
for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) OR a 
ﬁ
rst class as speciﬁ
ed by the university/institute.
10.2.3 Admission to M.Tech Program (Regular)
a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or a
master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Sciences, Agricultural Sciences and
Veterinary Sciences or in related 
ﬁ
eld
b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as speciﬁ
ed
by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category
on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other
than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a 
ﬁ
rst
class as speciﬁ
ed by the university/institute.
c) The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD
circular or have qualiﬁ
ed an equivalent National Examination or have qualiﬁ
ed in the written
test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
10.2.4 Admission to MTech Program (Executive/Part-time/ External/Sponsored)
a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or a
master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and
Veterinary Science or in related 
ﬁ
elds.
b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as speciﬁ
ed
by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category
on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other
than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category (4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a 
ﬁ
rst
class as speciﬁ
ed by the university/institute.
c) The applicant must have a minimum of two years work experience (after qualifying degree)
in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to the
program. However, the credit accumulation for the program may start immediately after
the qualifying degree. Petitioning for the degree can happen only 1 year after registration.
d) The applicant must qualify written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
10.2.5 Admission to M .Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program (Regular)
a) The applicant must have bachelor’s degree in engineering or science (4 year program) or a
master’s degree in science, MCA, Pharmacy, Medical Science, Agricultural Science and
Veterinary Science or in related 
ﬁ
eld
b) A minimum of 60% marks for GEN/OBC (55% for SC/ST) category in aggregate or as speciﬁ
ed
by the university/institute or a minimum CGPA of 6.0 for GEN/OBC (5.5 for SC/ST) category
on the scale of 10; with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other
than on 10 (for example 4.8 for GEN/OBC category 4.4 for SC/ST) on a scale of 8) or a 
ﬁ
rst
class as speciﬁ
ed by the university/institute.
c) The applicant must either have a valid GATE score or exempted from GATE as per MHRD
circular or have qualiﬁ
ed an equivalent National Examination or have qualiﬁ
ed in the written
test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
10.2.6 Admission to Ph.D. Program (Regular)
a) Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic
program in India or abroad, and shall not be a full-time or part-time employee of any
organization in India or abroad.
b) The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science,
science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10
CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),
OR
c) The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with
MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA
for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,
OR
d) The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four year duration in engineering
or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or
equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/OBC (65% for
SC/ST) .
10.2.7 Admission under any special scheme like Quality Improvement Programme (QIP),
Defence Personnel
The procedures and criteria for admission of these candidates can be decided with the approval
of Chairman, Senate.
10.2.8. Admission of Indian Nationals Residing Abroad (INRA) and Foreign Nationals
INRA candidates must have been residing abroad continuously for at least one year at the time of
applying for admission.
The applications of INRA and foreign nationals may be processed by the departments as and
when they are received or according to any schedule convenient to the department. The
applications should be scrutinized to make sure that, both in terms of qualiﬁ
cations and
attainment they are comparable with the candidates admitted in the general category.
Department will conduct VC based interview for ascertaining suitability of the candidate.
The applications of foreign nationals, who are sponsored by the Indian Council of Cultural
Relations (ICCR) will be scrutinized by the department concerned to assess their suitability for
admission to the programme. The department's recommendation will be sent to the Chairperson,
Senate through the Chairperson, AC.
10.2.9 Admission to Ph.D. (sponsored/external/part-time)
a) Candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic
program in India or abroad.
b) The applicant must have a master’s degree in engineering, pharmacy, agricultural science,
science, humanities, social sciences, management with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10
CPI or CGPA for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST),
OR
c) The applicant must have MBBS with MD/MS, BVSc with MVSc, BDS with MDS, BPTh with
MPTh, BOTh with MOTh or equivalent with at least 60% marks or at least 6.0/10 CPI or CGPA
for GEN/GEN-EWS/OBC (55% for SC/ST) in bachelor’s degree,
OR
d) The applicant must have a bachelor’s degree of minimum four year duration in engineering
or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or
equivalent with at least 70% marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA for GEN/OBC (65% for
SC/ST) .
e) The applicant must have a minimum of two years work experience (after qualifying degree)
in industry/R&D laboratories/Academic Institutions at the time of registration to the
program.
f) The applicant must qualify written test and/or interview conducted by IIT Jodhpur.
10.3 Admission of Non-Degree Students
A non-degree student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or
university in India or abroad, and who is oﬃ
cially sponsored by that institute or university to
complete part of his/her academic requirements at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the non-degree
student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other
academic facilities.
Any candidate can be admitted as a casual student for speciﬁc courses provided the candidate
satisﬁes the minimum eligibility criteria speciﬁed in Section 10.2. The application must be routed
through the oﬃce of Dean R&D. A casual student can register up to a maximum of 9 credits in a
semester. On successful completion of the course, students will be awarded with a Course
Completion Certiﬁcate and Grade obtained. A casual student can also accumulate credits to
petition for a certiﬁcate or a diploma from IIT Jodhpur.
Students so admitted will be governed by all rules, regulations and discipline of the Institute.
10.4 Reservation Policy
The reservation policy of the Government of India will be followed.
11. PG REGISTRATION
11.1 Limits on Registration
Maximum and minimum number of credits a student can register in diﬀ
erent programs:
● M.Sc.: A M.Sc. student can register for a maximum of 24 credits and a minimum of 10
credits in a semester.
● M.Tech.: A M.Tech. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table
11.1.

● M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree/Direct Ph.D. (Joining after B.Tech.) - The maximum and
minimum credits that a M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree/direct Ph.D. student can register are
equivalent to that of a M.Tech. (Regular/External/Part-time) student.
● Ph.D.: A Ph.D. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per Table 11.2.

11.1.1 Registration Kept Alive (RKA)
A student admitted to a M.Tech program who has at least completed minimum credit
requirement of the first semester, can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any
professional activity, by opting for RKA in subsequent semesters. The candidate must indicate his
intent of RKA before the last date of late registration through DRC to Dean (academic). The
candidate has to pay appropriate registration fees for RKA status.
11.2 Change of Registration from M.Tech. (Regular) Programme to M.Tech. (Part-time)
Programme
A full-time regular M.Tech. student may be allowed to change the registration to the part-time
M.Tech. programme after successful completion of third semester. A student requesting such a
conversion must:
i) get the request endorsed by the supervisor(s) and the DRC; and
ii) produce a "No Objection" Certificate from his/her employer for carrying out the
research work
11.3 Change of Registration from M.Tech. Programme to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree
Programme
A regular student registered for the M.Tech. programme having CGPA 8 or more at the end of
second semester may be allowed to switch to M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program till the end of
third semester. As a special case, a student can switch to dual degree in the fourth semester with
the approval of DRC, provided his/her CGPA is 8 or more, who will then be required to complete
his/her candidacy requirements by the end of fifth semester.
All conditions of the M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree program will be applicable to all such students. All
such changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate.
11.3 Change of Registration from Part-Time M.Tech. to Part-Time Ph.D. Program
A part-time M.Tech. student having CGPA 8 or more after completion of at least 24 credits may be
allowed to change his/her registration to the Ph.D. program. The credits earned will be counted
towards his/her Ph.D. course work requirements.
11.4 Change of Registration from Full-Time to Part-Time/External Ph.D. Programme
A student admitted to a full-time Ph.D. programme may be permitted to change to a part-time
Ph.D. programme. A student requesting such a conversion must:
i) have successfully completed his/her candidacy requirement;
ii) get the request endorsed by the supervisor(s) and the DRC;
iii) produce a "No Objection" Certificate from his/her employer for carrying out the
research work.
11.5 Maximum Duration of a Program
● M.Sc. - 8 registered semester
● M.Tech. (Regular and Part-time/External/Executive) - 12 registered semesters which
may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive (RKA) after completion of
the first semester. Tuition fee post RKA will be the same as that of sponsored candidates.
● Ph.D. and M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree (Regular and Part-time/External) - 14
registered semesters which may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive
(RKA) after completion of the two semesters. Tuition fee post RKA will be the same as
that of sponsored candidates.
● Students may request for RKA to Dean (Academics) through DRC.
11.6 Course Registration
Students will be eligible to register for courses as per the criterion specified in Section 11.1 and
Table 4.4.
The DRC/ IRC must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during
her/his Masters or Bachelors program.
12. ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS
12.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for PG Programmes
The total credits for a course is calculated by taking into account the number of lectures, tutorial,
and practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 12.1 and 12.2 for M.Sc. and M.Tech. Ph.D.
programmes respectively. Each credit is associated with the number of contact hours and the
expected number of self-learning hours (on an average) to be spent by the student for each
contact hour to meet academic demand of the course.

12.2 Course categories for Masters’ programmes
1) Compulsory Course (MC)
2) Programme Compulsory (PC)
2) Programme Elective (ME)
3) Open Elective (MO/OE)
4) Specialization Core (SC)
5) Specialization Elective (SE)
6) Specialization Stream Electives (SSE)
7) Micro Specialization Core (MSC)
8) Project works (MP)
9) Non-graded (NG)

The indicative maximum credits, a student registers in a semester, are notional. In addition to the
above minimum credit requirements through coursework, Ph. D. students are further required to
complete four compulsory non-graded (NG) courses before the open seminar. A student already
completed a NG course as part of his/her program need not register for the same course again.
The coursework requirements for IDRP Ph.D. students will be in line with Table 12.6.
While securing the minimum overall CGPA requirement in 12 (Ph.D. in departmental domains)/ 24
(Ph.D. in IDRP domains with M.Sc. degree in a Science discipline/direct Ph.D.) earned credits, a
course repeat process may be allowed for a maximum of 4 credits for Ph.D. students in
departmental domains and 8 credits for Ph.D. students in IDRP domains with M.Sc. degree in a
Science discipline or for students enrolled in direct Ph.D. programme. The student can repeat
course(s) within the said credit limit in which he has obtained a pass grade but performance is
poor (secured grade is B- or lower). No replacement of course(s) in which the student has
secured pass grade and above is allowed. If the student opts to repeat a course, then the grade
secured in the next attempt will prevail.

12.8.2 Degree Grade Point Average (DGPA) for Ph.D. students
A PhD student who has completed the credit requirements for the course work but has a CGPA
less than 7.5 (required for graduation) will be evaluated using Degree Grade Point Average
(DGPA) where DGPA is defined with respect to the best performance of the student in minimum
number of credits.
12.8.3 Continuing criteria for M.Sc.
M.Sc.- The student must earn at least 20 credits at the end of second semester for continuation in
the program.

13. LEAVE RULES
Application for leave of absence should be addressed to the Convener DRC, and submitted with a
medical certificate, if applicable. Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval of
the DRC.
13.1 Leave
A maximum of 30 days in an academic year (including leave on medical grounds + mid semester
break). The student must apply for leave in advance even during the summer/winter term or
mid-semester break.
A PhD student cannot avail leave for more than 15 days at a stretch
An M.Tech./M.Sc. student cannot avail leave for more than 10 days at a stretch
The leave beyond 30 days in an Academic Year may be granted in exceptional cases by DRC
without assistantship during that period.
13.2 Other Leaves
Maternity leave for Ph.D. students is sanctioned as per the directives of MoE. It will not be
counted towards maximum permissible duration of the programme.
Any other leave may also be permissible as per the guidelines of MoE.
13.3 Semester Withdrawal
May be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. Absence for a period of
four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester.
In all such cases, the fellowship will be stopped with immediate effect and it will be continued for
only after the student rejoins the institute. DRC can approve and intimate Office of Academics
regarding the leave of the student for records. In case, the leave extends beyond a semester, it
can only be approved through the Academic Committee. Semester withdrawal on medical
ground will not be counted towards maximum permissible duration of the programme for the
student.
13.4 Academic Leave
Academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons, such as
1. Field work
2. Library work- because of a specialized collection at a particular library
3. Experimental work/training using specialized facility not available at IITJ
4. Attending conferences/workshops/summer/winter schools/symposium
5. Collaborative work as part of joint M.Tech./Ph.D. supervision
6. Collaborative work for a specific problem related to his ongoing Ph.D programme as
indicated in his research proposal
7. Exchange program – as part of an exchange program with sister institution in India or
abroad
All such requests must be evaluated and approved by SRC/DRC/IRC before the leave is
granted. SRC/DRC/IRC must also make recommendations regarding continuation of fellowship
during academic leave.
● A student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one year on academic leave.
● A student during academic leave can earn a maximum of 12 credits per semester as
certified by SRC and approved by DRC.
14. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
Financial assistantship/scholarship will be provided to the eligible students admitted
under regular full-time program. The eligibility criteria are as per the following:
14.1 M.Sc. Program
Merit-cum-Means fellowship as per Institute norms.
14.2 M.Sc.-M.Tech. Dual-Degree Program
A student having completed minimum credit requirements of a M.Sc. program at the end of
second year with
a. CGPA>=8
OR
b. have qualified GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund.
14.3 M.Tech. Program
A regular M.Tech. student with GATE can have financial support from MHRD or project fund. A
student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.
14.4 Executive M Tech Program
Students admitted in this category will not be provided any financial assistance from the
Institute.
14.5 M.Tech. – Ph.D. Dual Degree Program
Rules and regulations governing financial assistance for dual degree students will be at par with
regular Ph.D. students.
14.6 Ph.D. Program
A regular Ph.D. student admitted to the Institute will be eligible for financial assistance as per the
norms of IIT Jodhpur.
a. A candidate having B.Tech./B.S. (four-year program)/Master's degree with
GATE/NET(JRF)/NBHM (or equivalent) can have financial assistance as per MHRD norms.
b. The requirement of GATE is exempted for an applicant with M.Tech. or equivalent
post-Bachelor’s degree
c. A student may be exempted from GATE as per MHRD guidelines.
A Ph.D. student would be eligible for enhancement in the scholarship after two years provided
the student has met the qualifier requirement. Enhanced fellowship will commence from the
date of completion of both the conditions. No arrears will be provided due to delay in completing
the qualifier requirement. No arrears will be provided due to delay in completing the above
requirements.
The Teaching/Research Assistantship of a Ph.D. student will continue till thesis Defense or end of
the semester in which he/she has submitted thesis, whichever is earlier. The above is permissible
subject to assistantship/fellowship available in the semester under question as per
MHRD/CSIR/DST/UGC rule.
15. RULES AND REGULATION FOR CONDUCT AND EVALUATION OF
M.TECH./M.SC. PROJECT
● Allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the
students and supervisor(s).
● The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the first
semester.
● Coordinator, M. Tech. Program would advise until the student is assigned to regular
supervisor(s).
● Each semester a letter grade will be awarded after examination by a committee
consisting of DRC, supervisor(s) and two members conversant with the field of research
with at least one-member external to the department (may be outside the Institute also).
DRC will appoint examiners in consultation with the supervisor. Same committee may
examine more than one thesis. The external member can be on VC. DRC will ensure that
the Award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy.
● A regular full-time student must register for M.Tech Project Part-1 in the summer
semester following 2nd semester. He must obtain a satisfactory grade to continue M.Tech
project part-1 in the next semester. His performance in the summer semester will be
evaluated by his supervisor.
16. RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR PH. D. /M. TECH.-PH. D. DUAL DEGREE
PROGRAM
16.1 Thesis Supervisor(s)
16.1.1 Selection of Ph.D. Candidates
The selection should be based on merit and capability of the candidate to conduct research.
There should at least be a faculty member available or likely to join in the areas of interest of the
candidate at the time of selection.
16.1.2 Appointment of Thesis Supervisor(s)
● Ph. D. students shall be admitted in the department and no supervisor shall be
assigned at the time of selection.
● Allotment of students to supervisor(s) will be made based on the preferences of the
students and supervisor(s).
● For both Ph. D. and M. Tech. - Ph. D. Dual degree supervisor(s) and area identification
must be completed by the end of the first semester.
● The Convener, DRC (Department Research and Postgraduate Committee)/Coordinator,
IRC (Interdisciplinary Research Program Committee) would advise until the student is
assigned to regular supervisor(s).
● There shall not be more than two supervisors, in general, for a student. Additional
supervisor can be allowed with the approval of Chairman, Senate.
● A supervisor from outside the institute, before qualifier, may be appointed on the
request of student/supervisor(s) with the recommendation of the DRC/IRC and the Dean
(Academics) and approval of the Chairman, Senate.
● The external supervisor will be requested to sign Intellectual Property Right (IPR) and
Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) documents as a part of acceptance. From the financial
point of view the Institute will have no obligation to the external supervisor.
16.1.3 Caretaker Supervisor/Additional supervisor
● Whenever the supervisor proceeds on short leave for a period up to one year, the
DRC/IRC shall appoint a caretaker supervisor in consultation with the supervisor and the
student to take care of the administrative requirements.
● Whenever the supervisor proceeds on long leave for a period more than a year, then an
additional supervisor needs to be appointed on the suggestion of the supervisor.
● The supervisor going on lien or sabbatical may continue supervising students and the
supervisor can opt for either an additional supervisor or a caretaker supervisor.
● The supervisor on his/her retirement or on resignation may continue as supervisor and
will have to opt for an additional supervisor provided the student has cleared the qualifier
before supervisor’s retirement/resignation.
16.1.4 Composition of Departmental Research Committee (DRC)
The DRC will consist of coordinators of M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree and Ph.D. programs of
the department, head of the Department and Senior Professor/Associate Professor proposed by
the Head. The DRC will be Chaired by a Professor/Associate Professor nominated by the Head of
the Department. The Chairman of the DRC will be a member of the Academic Committee. The
DRC has to be approved by the Dean (Academics). Ph.D. program coordinator will be the
convenor of DRC and will be proposed by the head. The tenure for the DRC will be 2 years.
16.1.5 Composition of Interdisciplinary Research Committee (IRC)
The IRC will consist of all coordinators of IDRPs and Senior Professor/Associate Professor as the
chairman of the IRC will be nominated by Dean (Academics). The chairman of IRC will be a
member of AC. One of the IDRP co-ordinators would be convenor of the committee. The tenure
for the IRC will be 2 years. The IRC will be approved by the Dean (Academics).
16.2 Change of Research Supervisor
Change of supervisor(s) under exceptional circumstances shall be permitted by Dean
(Academics) on recommendation of the DRC/IRC after obtaining the consent of
(i) the student (ii) the present supervisor(s) and (iii) the proposed supervisor(s).
If required, realignment of student’s research program will happen under supervision of the
DRC/IRC.
16.3 Student Research Committee (SRC)
16.3.1 Composition of SRC
● The SRC will normally consist of supervisor(s) and three other faculty members
conversant with the field of research with at least one-member external to the
department (may be outside the Institute also).
● A Student Research Committee (SRC) for the candidate shall be proposed by the
supervisor(s), recommended by the DRC/IRC and approved by the Dean (Academics).
● The SRC shall have one member identified as Chairman for administrative functions and
the supervisor(s) will act as convener. Chairman, SRC is to be appointed by Dean
(Academics).
● The appointment of SRC should be completed by the end of the first semester.
● Any subsequent changes in the composition of SRC shall be communicated through
the DRC/IRC to Dean (Academics) for record.
● The SRC and supervisor(s) shall be the internal examiners for the evaluation of the
thesis.
● The SRC is expected to monitor the progress of the candidate until the
completion of the program.
16.4 Annual Progress Monitoring Meeting (APM)
Academic progress of all registered Ph.D. students will be reviewed once in a year by the SRC and
peers in the institute. The review will be based upon (i) Annual Progress Report and (ii) A Poster
Presentation open to all. SRC will award Satisfactory/Non-Satisfactory grade based upon (i) and
(ii). Two consecutive non-satisfactory grades will lead to termination of registration.
For implementational convenience, the academic calendar must indicate two days in a year for
conducting annual progress evaluation of research scholars. Following groupings of students and
scheduling guidelines are suggested
1. For students joining in 1st semester of AY: APM must be conducted by the Last Working
Date of September of every year
2. For students joining in 2nd semester of AY: APM must be conducted by the Last Working
Date of February of every year
The first APM will be conducted after successful completion of qualifier requirements. Those
students who have got 6 months extension to complete qualifier requirements, for them APM
can be scheduled even after a semester from the date of completion of qualifier
requirements. Each semester “Satisfactory” progress or “Unsatisfactory” progress will be
reported by supervisor(s) through the SRC for record.
Any situation in exception to the above will be processed by the academic committee and
approved by Dean (academics)
16.5 Qualifier requirements of Ph.D. Student
The following four components together will constitute qualifier (candidacy) requirements for a
Ph. D. student and for a Ph. D. candidate to be eligible for the enhanced SRF fellowship.
1. Completed course requirements with the minimum CGPA specified in Section 12.8.1
2. Cleared comprehensive examination
3. Successful presentation on state of the art of the chosen field of research
4. Successful presentation and defense of Research proposal
The Ph. D. students are normally expected to complete successfully the Qualifier requirements
before the beginning of the fifth semester of his/her registration in the Ph. D. program and in any
case not later than the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in the Ph. D.
program. Part-time and direct Ph.D. candidates will need to complete qualifier requirements
before the beginning of the seventh semester. M.Tech.-Ph.D. candidates will need to complete
qualifier requirements before the beginning of the fifth semester and in any case not later than
the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in the program. For M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual
degree students, the 16 credits associated with the M.Tech. project II are to be converted to the
RP.
16.5.1 Comprehensive Examination of Ph. D. /M.Tech-Ph.D Student
● The comprehensive examination must be designed to test the general capability of the
student and the breadth of his/her knowledge in the discipline and areas related to the
field of research.
● The Comprehensive Examination shall be conducted by a Comprehensive Examination
Committee of the Department/IDRP.
● The Comprehensive Examination will consist of a written test with three papers.
● Departments will offer at least 5 Papers for conducting the comprehensive examination.
Each paper will have broad coverage of one essential sub-area of the department. Course
content of these papers will be approved by the academic committee and Senate. The
syllabus of papers for the comprehensive examination will not be the same as courses
offered by the department; it must be designed to test the breadth of the knowledge in
that area.
● The SRC will specify a set of three papers as comprehensive requirements for a particular
student. These three papers may be selected from across the departments.
● The comprehensive examination requirements shall be intimated to the Ph.D. student
within two weeks of SRC formation.
● All comprehensive examinations will be scheduled on two fixed days in a year. It can
coincide with the annual progress evaluation day of doctoral candidates. Students may
decide to appear for three papers on the same day or on different days.
● A student can appear in the comprehensive examination before he/she has completed
the course requirements and satisfied the minimum specified CGPA requirement.
● If the performance of the Ph.D. student in a comprehensive examination paper in the first
attempt is not satisfactory, he/she will be given one more opportunity to appear during
the next scheduled comprehensive examination as per the academic calendar. For valid
medical or unforeseen reasons, if a student is not able to register for the comprehensive
examination, the comprehensive examination may be rescheduled within that semester
with prior approval to the Dean/Associate Dean (PG- Programs).
● For clearing the comprehensive examination, a student must perform satisfactorily in all
papers.
Comprehensive Examination to be completed by the students:
● Ph.D.: within 3 semesters
● Direct Ph.D. and Part-Time Ph.D.: within 5 semesters
16.5.2 State of Art Seminar (SOTA)
Every Ph.D. student is required to give a general seminar in the Department covering the State of
Art of the area of research. The presentation must also include patent landscaping of the area.
The presentation will be evaluated by the SRC. A candidate must have a satisfactory grade in
SOTA awarded by SRC for becoming eligible to present his research proposal. The State of the Art
seminar must be completed before finalization of the research proposal. For M.Tech.-Ph.D.
students, the presentation in M.Tech. Project I will be considered as SOTA.
16.5.3 Research Proposal
Research proposal (report + presentation) will be evaluated by SRC after successful completion
of SOTA. The Research proposal must include representative research work equivalent to
research work worth 16 credits. SRC will allocate a letter grade based on the performance of the
candidate.
16.6 Candidacy for the Ph.D. Degree
A student enrolled in the Ph.D. program is formally admitted to the candidacy for the Ph.D.
degree after he/she has completed the qualifier requirements for the degree. Only such students
who are admitted to the candidacy will be allowed to submit Ph.D. thesis

16.7 Relaxation in M.Tech. -Ph.D. dual degree program
● M.Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree students who have successfully completed all qualifier
requirements, under exceptional conditions, as approved by SRC after 3 years can also
convert into part-time/external Ph.D. students and exit with M.Tech degree if all
conditions for part-time/external conversion are satisfied.
● The renewal of their registration for every semester however, will be considered only if
SRC finds their progress to be satisfactory and recommends continuance of registration.
16.8 Cancellation of Registration
● The registration of a student whose progress is not found to be satisfactory by the SRC or
who has not enrolled will be liable for cancellation.
● The registration of a student who has not submitted his/her thesis before the end of the
maximum permissible period specified in Section 11.5 will be liable for cancellation.
16.9 Synopsis
● Synopsis will consist of an open seminar and a comprehensive internal close door
assessment of the research work, through a pre-synopsis report, by SRC.
● The student can submit the synopsis only if the SRC is satisfied about the quality and
quantity of the work for submission as a Ph.D. thesis.
● Publications arising out of the thesis are to be submitted along with the pre-synopsis
report.
● Students should submit the synopsis and thesis within six months of the open seminar
date. If required, an extension of three months may be permitted by Dean (Academics)
on the recommendation of SRC.
● If the synopsis and thesis are not submitted in the specified period, the student will be
asked to present the synopsis again.
● On satisfactory completion of the prescribed courses with minimum CGPA specified in
4.6.1, the comprehensive examination, the SOTA, the research work and the synopsis, the
student shall submit the requisite copies of the synopsis of his/her research work in the
required format through the supervisor(s) and HoD to the Academic Section for
consideration of the SRC.
● The student should have at least two publications in Scopus indexed journals and/or A+
conferences for Engineering and Science Departments. Requirements for the
Department of Humanities and School of Management & Entrepreneurship will be
specified separately.
16.10 Thesis submission and Evaluation
The supervisor(s) shall propose a list of 10 examiners consisting of at least four Faculty Members
from abroad and 4 Faculty Members from India, who have the expertise in the area in which the
student undertook research. For selecting an examiner, following guidelines should be followed
● The examiners shall have at least 6 years Post-Ph.D. experience;
● No two proposed examiners shall be from the same organization; and
● The examiners can be Faculty Members or Scientists, of standing and repute.
● Chairman, Senate may ask for additional names for examiners.
● The Chairman, Senate, shall select minimum two examiners from the proposed list, of
which at least one should be an examiner from outside India. The consent of these
examiners shall be taken before sending the Thesis to them. In addition, the SRC and
Supervisor(s) shall be the examiners of the Thesis.
● The Indian examiners shall attend in person the Thesis Defense.
● The examiners shall submit a written report on the Thesis within a period of two months
from the date of receipt of the Thesis.
● If both examiners declare the Thesis as acceptable for award of Ph.D. degree, the Dean
(Academics) shall request the Supervisor(s) to hold the Thesis Defense by the student.
● If any of the examiners rejects the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, the Dean
(Academics) shall report the matter to the Chairman, Senate, for further consideration.
The Chairman, Senate, will refer the Thesis to a third examiner under special
circumstances; else the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the Ph.D.
program.
● If both examiners reject the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D. degree, no degree shall be
awarded by the Institute, and the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the
Ph.D. program.
● If an examiner suggests revision of the Thesis, the student shall resubmit the Thesis after
the revision within a prescribed time period of 6 months in consultation with the
Supervisor(s).
● When both examiners recommend the Thesis as accepted for the student to defend the
Thesis, or after the resubmission of the Thesis after incorporating the
suggestions/corrections given by the examiners, the student shall publicly present the
Thesis and defend the contention of the Thesis.
● The committee consisting of Chairman SRC, Supervisor(s), the Examiner from within India
and other Faculty Members, who participated in the Comprehensive Examination of the
student, shall evaluate the Thesis Defense of the Ph.D. student also. On their
recommendation, Dean (Academics) shall recommend to the Senate, to consider the
award of Ph.D. degree to the student.

17.2 Academic
The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned
the minimum credits as per Section 12.3 for M. Sc., Section 12.4 for M. Tech., Section 12.5 for M.
Sc.-M.Tech. Dual Degree, Section 12.6 for M.Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree and Section 12.7 for Ph.D.,
while meeting the minimum CGPA requirements as mentioned in Section 12.8.
17.3 No Dues Clearance
The degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as
deemed necessary by Dean (Academics).
17.4 No case of Disciplinary Action
The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if
there is any case of indiscipline pending against her/him.
17.5 Award of Degrees
17.5.1 Provisional Certificate
A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, can be
provided a provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of Chairman,
Senate.
17.5.2 Degree Certificate
A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 17.1 to 17.4, is
recommended by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate
degree in the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its
approval.
17.6 Withdrawal of Degree
Under extremely exceptional circumstances, where gross violation of the graduation
requirements is detected at a later stage, the Senate may recommend to the Board of Governors
for withdrawal of a degree already awarded to the student.
18. AMENDMENTS
Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the
right to modify/amend, without notice, Rules and Regulations of the Postgraduate programmes
at IIT-Jodhpur

Appointment of Supervisor:
• Any faculty member at AIIMS/IIT Jodhpur holding fulltime position can be
designated as Supervisor.
• Faculty members of IIT and AIIMS can supervise Ph.D. students as per the
regulations of respective institute.
• The faculty member who himself/herself is registered for Ph.D. programme will not
be eligible for the supervision of Ph.D.
• There will be at-least one supervisor each from both AIIMS Jodhpur and IIT
Jodhpur. A maximum of three supervisors are allowed.
• External supervisor with at least two years of post-graduate teaching experience/2
years post PhD research experience as medical/non-medical
researcher/scientist/faculty member may be appointed as supervisor provided
he/she has original/significant research contribution in the field.
1. Qualifier Requirement and plan for thesis work
For the dual degree:
Step 1: After 1st semester-
The candidate has to identify the need from immersion+ problem definition
emphasizing scope for innovation and development
Step 2: After 4th Semester and by 5th Semester-
SOTA seminar + detailed presentation on scientific challenges and innovation model
of the identified problem
Step 3: After 6th Semester and by 7th Semester
Present translation agenda and/or business plan
Step 4: After 7th Semester
To take a call while presenting, whether to opt for degree with translational
component/ product development
OR
Opt for incubation with a business plan
For Ph.D. degree:
• Step 1: After 1st Semester
• The candidate has to identify the need from immersion+ problem definition
emphasizing scope for innovation and development
• Step 2: By end of 2nd Semester
• Present foundation of the identified problem of product development
• Step 3: By end of 3rd Semester
• Present SOTA seminar
3
• Step 4: By end of 4th Semester
• Present complete plan for translation/prototyping the device
• Step 5: By end of 7th Semester
• To take a call while presenting, whether to opt for degree with translational
component /product development
OR
• Opt for incubation with a business plan
Assessment of the work of the candidates
• Annual progress work during the thesis work shall be assessed by the Doctoral
committee and a report will be submitted to the Dean through the supervisor.
• The doctoral committee will be formed after 1st Semester and before end of second
semester
Thesis and examination
• The thesis will be submitted after an open seminar presented by the candidate and
the approval of the Doctoral committee.
• At least two patents (or equivalent IP right document) filed is essential for
submitting the thesis.
• Each candidate shall submit four print copies and pdf format of the thesis duly
certified by the Supervisor and the Co-Supervisor(s) for evaluation after completion
of the required period.
• A panel of examiners shall be submitted before the expected date of submission of
the thesis, by the supervisor, in consultation with the Doctoral committee. The
panel shall include eight examiners who are experts in the field of the study
undertaken by the candidate (three of these shall be from abroad).
• The supervisors may go for the consent of the examiners before proposing the
names in the examiner list.
• In the thesis evaluation form, the points of judgment of the thesis can be the
novelty/contribution of the product development/translation
• After approval of thesis by the external and the internal examiners the viva voce
examination will be held to adjudge the proficiency of the candidate in the
subject(s) allied to the candidate’s field of work.
• If the thesis is rejected by more than one examiner, it will stand rejected and shall
not be referred to any other examiner. However, in the event the thesis is rejected
by only one examiner, it will be referred to another examiner from among the
approved panel. In case the thesis is approved by this examiner, it will be
considered as unanimously approved, else the respective Chairman, Senate may
advise course of action.
4
• If one or more examiner recommends re-submission/modification of thesis, the
same shall be done within a maximum period of six months from the date of
intimation to the candidate.
• If the report from all the external examiners is not received within three months,
a copy of thesis will be sent to another examiner from amongst the approved panel.
• The thesis
• defense will be conducted in the presence of Doctoral committee and one of the
external examiners who has examined the thesis.
Credit Requirements for the Ph.D. degree
• Candidates enrolled in PhD, other than through Master’s programme : Compulsory
courses of Master’s Programme + 6 Elective Credits (Thesis 48)
• Candidates through Master’s programme —6 Elective Credits (Thesis 48)
Result
(a) If the Examiners are not satisfied with the performance of the candidate in the
above examination, the candidate will have to reappear for another viva vice
examination after a period of two months provided such specific
recommendation is made by the board of Examiners.
(b)The candidate shall be declared eligible for the award of the Degree of Doctor
of Philosophy only on the unanimous recommendations of the members of the
Board of Examiners at the viva voce examination.
Award of Degree:
The transcript will be issued by the institute in which the candidate will be registered. The
degree will be awarded jointly by AIIMS Jodhpur and IIT Jodhpur in alternate
Convocations.
The degree certificate will be issued and signed by competent authorities from both the
Institutes.

There has been an increasing need to embed innovation components in various academic programs.
Traditionally, research-based academic programs emphasize on scholarly publications. However, it is
also important to recognize other forms of contributions, i.e. patents, technology development,
entrepreneurship, etc., as outcomes of research initiatives. In view of this, the Institute has started MS
by Research programs in cross-disciplinary, multi-disciplinary as well as application-directed areas. The
research problems increasingly require a multidisciplinary approach to solve complex problems of
interest or propose solutions leading to new innovations and entrepreneurship ventures. Today, we
need in many cases diverse disciplines to engage in a spectrum of research-based activities ranging from
scientific to social issues that challenge contemporary society- establishing a consistency between
diverse academic spaces. A considerable demand exists for such professionals who can synthesize more
than one discipline and create teams of academicians and scholars that enrich the overall educational
and research experience.
M.S. by Research Programs are expected to be designed for:
i) Innovative Research Outcomes in cross-disciplinary / multi-disciplinary areas. Such Programs are
expected to be offered by schools or centres synergising diverse academic disciplines; admission will
be through the academic unit specified admission process.
ii) Innovation Driven Outcomes leading to EIR’s and / or Start-Up’s; admission will be through the
academic unit specified admission process.
iii) Targeted Deliveries linked to projects sponsored by external agencies. Only project fellows
appointed in a delivery-oriented project can register in part-time mode through a DRC/SRC/CRC
monitored selection process.
iv) The regular M.S. by Research students can be in the Centres and CoE only. The Department can admit
M.S. by Research students supported by the R&D project. Only one (01) M.S. by Research student can be
allocated to a faculty.

1.1. Registration Kept Alive (RKA)
A student admitted to an M.S. by Research program who has at least completed minimum credit
requirement of the first semester, can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any professional
activity, by opting for RKA in subsequent semesters. The candidate must indicate his intent of RKA before
the last date of late registration through DRC to Dean(academic). The candidate has to pay appropriate
registration fees for RKA status (similar to M.Tech. students). A student can maintain RKA status for a
maximum of 6 semesters.
1.2 Change of Registration from M.S. by Research Programme to Ph.D. Programme
The M.S. by Research Degree can be upgraded to Ph.D. based on the CGPA (>7.5) and progress of the student
after 3 Semesters for regular students; however, transition will require continuation of the same work and
the student has to satisfy regular PhD requirements. All conditions of Ph.D. degree program will be
applicable to all such students. All such changes of registration shall be reported to the Senate.
1.3 Maximum Duration of a Program
A full-time M.S. by Research student can complete the program between 2 years (minimum) to 4 years
(maximum). A part-time student can complete the program between 3 years (minimum) to 5 years
(maximum)
2 ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS
2.1 Academic Load & Calculation of Credits for a Course for PG Programs
The total credits for a course is calculated by taking into account the number of lectures, tutorial, and
practical hours (L-T-P) assigned as given in Table 2.1. Each credit is associated with the number of contact
hours and the expected number of self-learning hours (on an average) to be spent by the student for each
contact hour to meet academic demand of the course.

2.2. Academic Credit Requirements for M.S. by Research Students
A student enrolled in the M.S. Program will require to complete 24 credits through course work, including
the 4 NG credits, and 36 credits through research; The coursework credits may include elective courses-
suggested by the School/Centers/SRC- and a presentation towards the assigned/defined research problem

2.4 Degree Grade Point Average (DGPA) for M.S. by Research students
A M.S. by Research student who has completed the credit requirements for the course work but has a CGPA
less than 7.5 (required for graduation) will be evaluated using Degree Grade Point Average (DGPA) where
DGPA is defined with respect to the best performance of the student in minimum number of credits

3. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
Financial assistantship/scholarship will be provided to the eligible students admitted under regular
full-time program. The regular M.S. by Research students would get fellowship/assistantship up to a
maximum of 2 years as JRF starting from the date of registration. In exceptional cases, the fellowship can be
extended to a maximum of one more year depending on the work done and the recommendations of the
supervisor and SRC.
4. LEAVE RULES
Leave rules for M.S. by Research will be followed as per the approved Rules and regulation for Ph.D. students
enrolled from July 2022 onwards.
5. RULES AND REGULATION FOR CONDUCT AND EVALUATION OF M.S. project/thesis
a) Allotment of students to supervisors will be made on the preferences of the students and
supervisor(s).
b) The supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the first semester.
c) Head or CRC would advise the student until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor(s)
d) The SRC will normally consist of supervisor(s) and three other faculty members conversant with the
field of research with at least one-member external to the center (may be outside the Institute also).
e) A Student Research Committee (SRC) for the candidate shall be proposed by the supervisor(s),
recommended by the CRC and approved by Dean (Academics).
f) The SRC shall have one member identified as Chairman for administrative functions and the
supervisor(s) will act as convener. Chairman, SRC is to be appointed by Dean (Academics).
g) The appointment of SRC should be completed by the end of the first semester.
h) Any subsequent changes in the composition of SRC shall be communicated through the CRC to
Dean (Academics) for record.
i) The SRC and supervisor(s) shall be the internal examiners for the evaluation of the thesis.
j) The SRC is expected to monitor the progress of the candidate until the completion of
the program.
k) More than one student may be allowed to work on a problem of multi-disciplinary nature with a
clear justification and problem statement describing the roles and responsibilities of the students
l) The quality of the work can be assessed in terms of publications / patents / innovations / technology
transfers / start-ups at the end of the project;
5
m) The Project / Thesis will be required to be evaluated by one examiner outside the Institute from the
list of examiners proposed by the SRC and the SRC.
6. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS
A student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation, if she/he has met the requirements
laid down in Clauses 6.1 to 6.4 below.

6.2 Academic
The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she/he has earned the minimum
credits as per Section 2.2, while meeting the minimum CGPA requirements as mentioned in Section 2.3.
6.3 No Dues Clearance
Degree will be awarded after obtaining No Dues Clearance from all concerned sections as deemed necessary
by Dean (Academics).
17.4 No case of Disciplinary Action
The student shall not be considered to have completed the Academic Requirements if there is any case of
indiscipline pending against her/him.
6.5 Award of Degrees
6.5.1 Provisional Certificate
A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 6.1 to 6.4, can be provided a
provisional certificate by the office of Dean (Academics) on the approval of Chairman, Senate.
6.5.2 Degree Certificate
A student, who completes all the graduation requirements specified in Clauses 6.1 to 6.4, is recommended
by the Senate to the Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate degree in the ensuing
convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the BOG accords its approval.
6.6 Withdrawal of Degree
6
Under extremely exceptional circumstances, where gross violation of the graduation requirements is
detected at a later stage, the Senate may recommend to the Board of Governors for withdrawal of a degree
already awarded to the student.
7. AMENDMENTS
Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the right to
modify/amend, without notice, Rules and Regulations of the Postgraduate programmes at IIT-Jodhpur

Faculty Profiles
Dr Parag Arvind Deshpande
Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Multidisciplinary Chemistry
Computational chemistry, Computational material science, Molecular simulation
Personal Information
Dr Parag Arvind Deshpande
Male
Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, NH 62, Nagaur Road, Karwar
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342030

Experience

    2024 - Present
    Professor

    Department of Chemical Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
    2014 - 2024
    Associate Professor

    Department of Chemical Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur

Qualification

    Ph.D 

Dr Angan Sengupta
Associate Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Chemical Engineering
Modelling & Simulations in Continuum Scale: Continuum modeling of flames to study its dynamic properties under various environmental conditions; Continuum modeling of confined and unconfined vapour cloud explosions to study its dynamic properties under various industrial and transport conditions; Determining of optimal safe layout of fuel tank farms during fire spread; Modelling and Simulations of various transient and steady processes & scenarios. Modelling & Simulations in Molecular Scale: Det
Personal Information
Dr Angan Sengupta
Male
Department of Chemical Engineering IIT Jodhpur, NH 65 Nagaur Road, Karwar
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342037

Experience

    2023 - Present
    Associate Professor

    Department of Chemical Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
    2020 - 2023
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Chemical Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2016
    Ph.D.

    Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay
    2010
    M.Tech.

    Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee
    2008
    B.Tech.

    West Bengal University of Technology

Dr Vikky Anand
Assistant Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Chemical Engineering
Electrohydrodynamics; Multiphase flow; Electro-desalting; Soft matter; Water/wastewater treatment
Personal Information
Dr Vikky Anand
Male
Department of Chemical Engineering IIT Jodhpur, NH 65 Nagaur Road, Karwar
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342037

Experience

    2020 - Present
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Chemical Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2019
    Ph.D.

    Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
    2015
    M.Tech.

    Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee
    2013
    B.Tech.

    National Institute of Technology Srinagar

Honours and Awards
2020
Institute Awards for Excellence in Ph.D ThesisWork

IIT Bombay
2020
RG Manudhane PhD Excellence Award

Department of Chemical Engineering, IIT Bombay
2018
Travel grant award by American

Physical Society Division of Fluid Dynamics, USA 2018.
Membership In Professional Bodies
2023
American Physical Society

Member
2021
Indian Institute of Chemical Engineers

Life Membership

Dr Prashant Kumar Gupta
Assistant Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur


Expertise
Chemical Engineering
Electrochemical Energy Storage Devices (Lithium, Sodium and Zinc Ion Battery), Electrocatalysis (HER, OER, CER, and Electrochemical CO2 Reduction), Electrochemical Biosensors
Personal Information
Dr Prashant Kumar Gupta
Male
Department of Chemical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur, NH 65 Nagaur Road, Karwar
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342037

Experience

    2020 - Present
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Chemical Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2019
    Ph.D.

    Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
    2011
    M.Tech.

    Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
    2009
    B.Tech.

    Bundelkhand Institute of Engineering & Technology Jhansi

Dr Praveen Kumar Sappidi
Assistant Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur


Expertise
Chemical Engineering
Multiscale modeling, Molecular simulation, Free energy simulations, Contaminant separation materials, Ionic liquids, Polymeric materials
Personal Information
Dr Praveen Kumar Sappidi
Male
Department of Chemical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur, NH 65 Nagaur Road, Karwar
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342037

Experience

    2020 - Present
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Chemical Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2020
    Postdoc

    University of Alabama USA
    2017
    Ph.D.

    Indian Institute of Technology Madras
    2011
    M.Tech.

    Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
    2009
    B.Tech.

    Bapatla Engineering College (Affiliated to Acharya Nagarjuna University)


Dr Tara Chand Kumawat
Assistant Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Chemical Engineering
Hydrodynamic stability; flow through porous media; Computational Fluid Dynamics; Antibubbles
Personal Information
Dr Tara Chand Kumawat
Male
Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, NH 62 Nagaur Road, Karwar
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342030

Experience

    2022 - Present
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Chemical Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2018
    Ph.D.

    Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur

Dr Sumit Kamal
Assistant Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Chemical Engineering
Fine Chemicals; Catalysis and Reaction Engineering, Process Development; Green Technology; Chemical Reaction Kinetics
Personal Information
Dr Sumit Kamal
Male
Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, NH- 62, Nagaur Road, Karwar
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342030

Experience

    2022 - Present
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Chemical Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2021
    Ph.D.

    Indian Institute of Technology Bombay


    Dr Krunal M. Gangawane
    Assistant Professor
    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Chemical Engineering
CFD; Lattice Boltzmann method; Nanoparticles-based phase change material
Personal Information
Dr Krunal M. Gangawane
Male
Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, NH- 62, Nagaur Road, Karwar
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342030

    https://krunalgangawane.wixsite.com/kmgangawane 

Experience

    2023 - Present
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Chemical Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2015
    Ph.D.

    Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee
    2010
    M.Tech.

    Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee
    2007
    B.E.

    Savitribai Phule Pune University

Honours and Awards
2022
Included in top 2% world scientists

Elsevier and Standford University
2021
Included in top 2% world scientists

Elsevier and Standford University
2017
Best Researcher Award

UPES Dehradun
Doctoral Theses Guided
2022
Computational study of Magnetohydrodynamics-based Heat and Mass Transfer inside enclosed systems by lattice Boltzmann method

Sudhanshu Kumar, NIT Rourkela
Membership In Professional Bodies
2023
Americal Institutions of Chemical Engineers

Annual
2018
Institution of Engineers (India)

Life membership
2016
Indian Instiution of Chemical Engineers (IICHE)

Life membership


Ongoing Projects

Decentralized Water Purification Units based on Sorption Assisted Membrane Technology

Department of Chemical Engineering designs and sets up decentralized water purification units based on Sorption Assisted Membrane Technology in rural and remote areas as a part of Scientific Social responsibility (SSR) under Unnat Bharat Abhiyaan (UBA).

PI : Prof. Pradip K Tewari

Polymers and Interfaces in Electronic Packaging

Details of the project can be found here:   (Download file: 103 KB)

SRG Project 2020 to 2023



Molecular-designing of polymer electrolyte membranes using computational approach to reduce methanol crossover in direct methanol fuel cell

Seed Grant Project 2021-2024

PI: Dr. Angan Sengupta

Design of Zn anode and non-native structured MnO cathode for stationary grid energy storage devices

DST Inspire

Seawater electrolysis using non-precious metal oxides as an anode for the selective conversion

Seed Grant Project 2021-2024

PI : Dr. Prashant K Gupta


Improving the efficiency of water removal from water-in-oil emulsion: Electrocoalescence of surfactant/polymeric emulsion

SERB - SRG Project 2021-2023

Electrodesalting of water-in-oil emulsion: an experiment, design and scale-up to smart electrocoalescerSeed Grant Project 2021-2024

PI : Dr. Vikky Anand

Molecular Exploration of designer solvents for the low temperature directional solvent desalination

DST - SERB Project 2021-2024

Molecular-level design and development of water in ionic liquids based electrolytes for the Na-ion batteries

Seed Grant Project 2021-2024

PI : Dr. Praveen K Sappidi


A new model of nephron formation from nephron progenitor cells tested through mathematical modeling of Wnt and Notch signaling pathways and experimental data.

Seed Grant Project 2022-2025

PI : Dr. Prasenjit Sarkar


Completed Projects

Design vetting of water transport pipeline

PI: Prof. Pradip K Tewari

Funding Agency: PHED

Project duration: 2019 - 2021


Removal of iron contaminant from the herbal product

PI: Prof. Pradip K Tewari

Funding Agency: M/s Umalaxmi Organics, Jodhpur

Project duration: 2019 - 2021


Designing of Potential Adsorbents via Molecular Modelling and Simulations for the High-Temperature Carbon Dioxide Capture

PI: Dr. Angan Sengupta

Funding Agency: DST-SERB

Project duration: 2019 - 2021


Collaborations

Department is providing:

    Consultancy to chemical industries;
    Technical guidance to Government Bodies such as Defence Establishments, Ministry of Jalshakti etc.

Industry and Institutional Collaborations

Goal: Focus on collaborative programs with industry and other academic institutes for constant upkeep of skills in line with industry needs and delivering high-impact research.

The Department is keen on collaboration with industry and academia worldwide. At present, Chemical Engineering Department is sharing its expertise with the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS), Ministry of Jal Shakti; Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), Ministry of Defence; International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) etc. Department has signed MoU with the industries for providing consultancy services. Department is also actively involved in Scientific Social Responsibility (SSR) and other societal initiatives.


Research & Infrastructure
The thrust research areas are:

    Molecular Engineering
    Sustainability
    Process Engineering Intelligence

Welcome to the Civil and Infrastructure Engineering
The rapidly urbanizing society and increasing quality of life demand reliable and intelligent infrastructure systems which are capable of catering to the societal needs at different scales – from an individual to the community level. Consequently, the civil and infrastructure industry has undergone profound changes and is constantly evolving. However, the new-age designs and innovations in the civil and infrastructure industry can only be driven by a group of engineering graduates having multidisciplinary training and a sound understanding of emerging technologies. The Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering, IIT Jodhpur  esatablished in January 2020. We started academics programs in the academic year 2020-2021. The department offers unique programs that incorporate and integrate the elements of conventional civil engineering with advanced transformative technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI), cyber-physical-systems (CPS), digital twins (DT), and automated management and information systems. Additionally, a major thrust is also planned on the design, implementation, and maintenance of large-scale integrated infrastructure systems across different domains. 

The focus areas of the department are :

    Energy and Environment
    Building Sciences, Safety, and Services
    Applications of AI, IoT and CPS in Civil and Infrastructure Engineering
    Smart and Integrated Infrastructure
    Urban Architecture and Planning
    Construction Technology and Management
    Transportation Engineering
    Structural Engineering
    Geotechnical Engineering
    Water resources Engineering
    Engineering Geology

Vision

"The Department strives to be an internationally renowned centre of excellence in education, research, and innovation with a major focus on sustainability and digitalization of infrastructure."
Missions

    Develop unique courses in the field of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering through advanced UG and PG programs with a multidisciplinary perspective.
    Establish high quality teaching and research facilities in the areas of smart, resilient, and sustainable infrastructure engineering to foster the needs of society.
    Promote consilient research through application of AI/ML, cyber-physical-systems, digital twin and advanced visualization in the areas of Energy, Environment, Transportation, and Construction.
    Promote innovative and entrepreneurial activities through intellectual property generation and transfer.
    Nurture the potential of students to become future leaders in the Civil Engineering industry for leadership achievements, scientific breakthroughs and social welfare.


News and Newsletter

Sr. No. 	Description
1 	Result of Ph.D. Admissions Second Round, AY 2025-26 Semester I (July 2025)
2 	The list of candidates Provisionally Shortlisted for M.Tech-Part Time Online Program (Bridge Engineering)
3 	Ph.D. Admission - Second Round (Year 2025-26, Semester I) Shortlisted candidates for written test and/or interview Session July 2025
4 	Ph.D. Admission (Re-open)
5 	Ph.D. Admission (Year 2025-26, Semester I) Provisionally Selected candidates Session July 2025
6 	M.Tech Addmission May 2025 (AY 2025-26) List of Provisionally Selected Candidates
7 	List of Provisionally Shortlisted Candidates for written Test and/or Interview of M.Tech Admission May 2025 (AY 2025-26)
8 	Ph.D. Admission (Year 2025-26, Semester I) Shortlisted candidates for written test and/or interview Session July 2025
9 	Department of Civil & Infrastructure Engineering, IIT Jodhpur Proudly announces the Launch of M.Tech. program in Bridge Engineering
10 	Ph.D. Admission - Selected (Provisionally) candidates Jan 2025 session
11 	Ph.D. Admission (Year 2024-25, Semester II) Shortlisted candidates Session December 2024
12 	Congratulation Dr.Saran Aadhar on being elected as the Associate of Indian Academy of Sciences. 


B.Tech

Through undergraduate programs, the department aims to provide an expanded but holistic understanding of different civil and infrastructure systems and an in-depth understanding of the differences, similarities, and relations between different scales and components of it. The students will be trained to integrate conventional methods with emerging technologies to design intelligent civil and infrastructure systems from a multidisciplinary perspective. They also get exposed to advanced transformative techniques such as Internet-of-Things (IoT), machine learning, big data, cyber-physical systems, and digital twin (DT) in the design and maintenance of different civil and infrastructure systems. The undergraduate programs offered by the department are as follows.

    B Tech [Regular] Civil and Infrastrcuture Engineering
    B Tech Civil and Infrastrcuture Engineering with specialization in Environmental Engineering
    B Tech Civil and Infrastrcuture Engineering with specialization in Smart Infrastructure 


M.Tech. in Energy Infrastructure

The department offers two graduate programs in Civil and Infrastructure Engineering. The program constitutes a unique value-added model that allows students to select courses from Specialized Stream Electives and M. Tech Electives buckets to build their knowledge in a specialized stream and gain skills they would need to enter into the desired industry. Specialized courses are designed to tap rapidly changing energy and environment market while employing emerging technologies. Furthermore, it builds a platform for multidisciplinary research to unravel complex problems associated with the urban environment and global energy infrastructure. The graduate program offered by the department are as follows.


1. M Tech/M Tech-Ph D in Civil and Infrastructure Engineering with Specialization in Energy:

To cater to future needs and emerging infrastructure, this program exclusively designed with a tremendous focus on energy sources such as solar, wind, and hydropower. The program is offered to the students/candidates with diverse engineering backgrounds from India and abroad who are interested in learning and applying the fundamental and advanced technologies (energy conversion, transmission, distribution, storage, and conservation) in different areas of energy engineering. The program equips students with a unique set of skills desired in multidisciplinary and dynamic energy industries.


2. M Tech/M Tech-Ph D in Civil and Infrastructure Engineering with Specialization in Environmental Engineering:


The program aims to produce scientifically and technologically resourceful professionals with a broad knowledge of environmental processes and engineering techniques integrated with basic knowledge of biosafety, toxicology, and other public health issues required in identifying emerging complex problems at the interface of environmental engineering and public health, and creatively developing effective solutions. This specially tailored program will enable students to think proactively and preemptively while confronting public health challenges emerging out of local and global environmental issues. The integration of major thrust areas of Civil, Infrastructure, and Environmental Engineering with Public health in this cross-disciplinary program will enable graduates to interface between urban development and the sustainable environment.


M.Tech. in Environmental Engineering

The department offers M.Tech. in Environmental Engineering


PhD Programs
The Department offers Ph.D. programs in all five major domains of Civil & Infrastructure Engineering: 

1. Transportation Engineering
2. Environmental Engineering
3. Structural Engineering
4. Geotechnical and Geological Engineering
5. Hydraulics and Water Resources Engineering

Dr Deepak Swami
Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

 Expertise
Manufacturing Engineering
Groundwater and Water Resources
Personal Information
Dr Deepak Swami
Male
Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur NH- 62, Nagaur Road, Karwar
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342030

Experience

    2026 - Present
    Professor

    Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
    2025 - 2026
    Associate Professor

    Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
    2015 - 2025
    Associate Professor

    School of Civil and Environmental Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Mandi

Qualification

    Ph.D

    Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee

Dr Trishikhi Raychoudhury
Associate Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

 Expertise
Civil Engineering
Environmental Engineering: Water quality and treatment; colloid filtration; solute fate and transport; groundwater remediation; application and implication of nanotechnology
Personal Information
Dr Trishikhi Raychoudhury
Female
Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, NH- 65, Nagaur Road, Karwar
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342037

Experience

    2021 - Present
    Associate Professor

    Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2011
    Ph.D.

    McGill University
    2005
    M.Tech.

    Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
    2002
    B.E.

    National Institute of Technology, Surat

Dr Ranju Mohan
Associate Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Civil Engineering
Traffic flow theory; Macroscopic and Microscopic modelling of traffic flow; Connected and autonomous vehicles; Dynamic Traffic Assignment
Personal Information
Dr Ranju Mohan
Female
Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, NH- 65, Karwar,
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342037

Experience

    2023 - Present
    Associate Professor

    Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
    2020 - 2023
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2020
    Post Doc

    Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
    2014
    Ph.D.

    Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai
    2007
    M.Tech.

    National Institute of Technology, Calicut
    2004
    B.Tech.

    School of Engineering, Cochin University of Science and Technology

Membership In Professional Bodies
2021
Indian Road Congress

Lifetime member
2021
Transportation Research Group of India

Lifetime member
2019
Word Conference of Transport Research

Temporary member

Dr Deepika Bhattu
Associate Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Civil Engineering
Emission sources, characterization and secondary aerosol formation potential; Real-time aerosol measurements using mass spectrometery techniques; Source apportionment techniques; Physical, chemical and hygroscopic properties of atmospheric aerosols and cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) activity
Personal Information
Dr Deepika Bhattu
Female
Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering IIT Jodhpur, NH 65 Nagaur Road, Karwar
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342037

Experience

    2023 - Present
    Associate Professor

    Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
    2020 - 2023
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2016
    Ph.D.

    Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur

Dr Aali Pant
Assistant Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Civil Engineering
Geoenvironmental Engineering; Reinforced Soil; Sustainable Geotechnics; Machine Learning
Personal Information
Dr Aali Pant
Female
Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur NH- 62, Nagaur Road, Karwar
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342030

Experience

    2022 - Present
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2020
    Ph.D.

    Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
    2013
    M.Tech.

    Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee
    2011
    B.Tech.

    Govind Ballabh Pant University of Agriculture and Technology

Dr Anusha S. Basavaraj
Assistant Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Civil Engineering
Quantitative Sustainability Assessment; Life cycle assessment; Alternative Construction Methods; Low Carbon Construction
Personal Information
Dr Anusha S. Basavaraj
Female
Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur NH- 62, Nagaur Raod, Karwar
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342030

Experience

    2025 - Present
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2022
    Ph.D.

    Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
    2015
    M.Tech.

    BMS College of Engineering
    2012
    B.E.

    Bangalore Institute of Technology

Dr Yogiraj Sargam
Assistant Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Civil Engineering
Cement-based materials; Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Storage (CCUS); Waste valorization; Nanomaterials
Personal Information
Dr Yogiraj Sargam
Male
Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, NH- 62, Nagaur Road, Karwar
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342030

Experience

    2025 - Present
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2021
    Ph.D.

    Iowa State University
    2019
    M.S.

    Iowa State University
    2013
    B.Tech.

    National Institute of Technology, Jamshedpur

Dr Subham Jain
Assistant Professor
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Expertise
Civil Engineering
Pavement functional evaluation; aggregate shape characterization
Personal Information
Dr Subham Jain
Male
Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, NH- 62, Nagaur Road, Karwar
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India - 342030

Experience

    2025 - Present
    Assistant Professor

    Department of Civil and Infrastructure Engineering

    Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur

Qualification

    2024
    Ph.D.

    Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
    2024
    M.Tech.

    Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
    2015
    B.Tech.

    National Institute of Technology, Silchar

Ongoing Projects

Mechanical Response of sedimentary rocks under extreme conditions:Implications for cryogenic fracking
Utilization of Inferior Quality Aggregate in Hot, Warm and Cold Mix Asphalt
In-situ remediation of arsenic by ferrous sulfide under heterogeneous porous media: Up-scaling effect and evaluation of long-term fate
Fracture-mechanical response of rocks subjected to freeze-thaw cycles
Black Carbon - Quantification and Real-time contribution of Key Sources (BC-QuaRKS)
Dynamic Traffic Assignment Model for Multi-class Traffic Lacking Lane Discipline
Source apportionment study, Emission inventory and Carrying capacity for Kota city, Rajasthan
Development of a two-way interactive driving simulator for Indian traffic
Transport behaviour of selected nanoparticles in the porous media for long duration under natural groundwater conditions
High-resolution climate-chemistry modeling over the Indo-Gangetic Plain (IGP) and western India
Risk of hydroclimatic extremes on major dams in India
Development of Subsonic wind tunnel facility for Aeolian Soil Migration and Mitigation in Thar Desert
Deep Learning Based Structural Condition Assessment and Health Monitoring
Discontinuum numerical modeling of confined masonry structures under in-plane and out-of-plane loading scenarios 
Climate sensitivity to anthropogenic aerosol loading over western India
Sustainable Geopolymer based solutions for Sand Dune Migration Mitigation in Thar Desert
Thermal Performance Prediction of Multi-Layered Ensembles Subjected to Fire Exposure
Development of a coupled damage-plasticity discrete element framework for unreinforced masonry subjected to monotonic and cyclic loading
Response of high-rise building structures under fire: Advanced simulations and design strategies
Understanding the impacts of Pre-Monsoon heat stress on Indian Summer Monsoon Precipitation in Arid regions of India under changing and anthropogenic climate
Flood Mechanisms in Arid and Semi-Arid Regions amidst Shifting Climate Patterns and Human Influence
Performance evaluation of selected geotextile-based liner material against seepage loss in water conservation system under a wide range of temperature
Faculty Development Program on "Recent Advances in Pavement Analysis, Design and Evaluation"
Alumni Community Engagement Fund (ACEF) to organize a one-day symposium on "offshore wind turbine foundations" at IIT Jodhpur
Short-term Online Course on “Structural Health Monitoring” under Smart Infrastructure and Sustainability
Sand Dune Migration Mitigation in Thar Desert - Wind tunnel and CFD analysis
Developing constitutive soil models to understand the response of monopile foundations in seismic regions
Capacity Building Program: Digitalization tools for Sustainable and Resilient Infrastructure Systems
Capacity Building Program: Cybersecurity for Water Infrastructure

Completed Projects 
Sand migration mitigation measures for the proposed haphasar solar park
Analysis of Fibre Glass Mast Tower due to Wind Load
Qualitative and Quantitative analysis /Chemical Test on 40 mm TMT Rebar for LARSEN & TOUBRO LIMITED (L&T Energy Hydrocarbon)
Analysis/Verification and validation of design of CTB under Project Himank, BRO
Suitability Checking of Cracked Isolated Footing
Investigation of Tor Steel
Capacity Enhancement of Sei Dam Tunnel Project WRD Rajasthan
Structural proof checking, supervision consultancy and regular inspections of warehouse constructions
Third Party Inspection for construction work of four-lane BT road at Pali under CM Budget announcement 2021-22

Collaborations

1. National Highway Authority of India (NHAI) signed MoU with IITJ on Friday, 24th October 2020

The MoU will facilitate the joint working of the two organizations in various domains including transportation engineering, structural engineering, geotechnical engineering, hydraulics engineering, infrastructure systems, earthquake engineering, urban and rural planning, and disaster management and planning. This MoU will also allow IIT Jodhpur's undergraduate and postgraduate students to undertake paid internships in any of the above-mentioned fields. This collaboration will help to bridge the industry-institution gap and develop technologies which can be adopted in practice.


Welcome to the Department of Computer Science & Engineering

Computer Science and Engineering, today, plays a major role in transforming every aspect of human life - in addressing social challenges and catalyzing the ongoing wave of the industrial revolution. The department is driven by its commitment to excel in next generation technology development and research. Our mission is to strengthen industry-academia collaborations and prepare our students to contribute to multi-disciplinary projects and R&D for solving problems of national interest.
Vision

To be among the top 10 departments in terms of research contributions, practical impact, and applications of Computer Science and Engineering in the country in the next 3 years, and internationally well known in some focused areas in the next 5 years. Some of our missions are to achieve excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subject for innovative discoveries; develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating; and develop and support the notion of “computing for all” across disciplines at the institute.


Mission

Our missions are to achieve excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subject for innovative discoveries; develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating; and develop and support the notion of “computing for all” across disciplines at the institute.

    (M1) Achieving excellence in research in fundamental as well as applied areas of CSE and allied subjects for innovative discoveries.
    (M2) Develop an academic ecosystem by collaborating within the institute, as well by means of international, national and regional institutes. The collaborations may be fostered by research visits, collaborative projects, joint thesis, internship guidance, research mentoring etc.
    (M3) Develop and support the notion of “computing for all” across disciplines at the institute.
    (M4) Embracing shared dialogue across disciplines and encouraging experiential learning to redefine the contours of traditional Computer Science teaching and learning. Be one of the leading departments in the country for hybrid CSE education.
    (M5) Define and solve real-world problems in collaboration with industry, and develop industry- connect by means of research grants/ consultancies, and collaborative projects. Develop Start-up ecosystem in emerging areas of computing in collaboration with other departments at IIT Jodhpur.
    (M6) Dissemination of knowledge without physical boundaries, i.e. classroom, online and other modes of teaching, to create a workforce which is ready to ethically solve technological challenges of the next generation.
    (M7) Provide thought leadership in public policy and ethics of emerging computing technologies towards building an equitable and ethical society.


Announcement Archive

    Provisionally shortlisted and waitlisted candidates for M.Tech (CSE & AI) (July-2025)
    Cutoff/Criteria for the PG admission from 2020 to 2025.
    List of candidates provisionally shortlisted for the P.hD. (July-2025) (IInd Round).(Criteria)
    Instructions and syllabus for the written test for M.Tech. and Ph.D. (July-2025).(15-May-25)
    Provisionally selected candidates for PhD Program for AY 2024-25 (II Semester)(List)
    List of International candidates provisionally shortlisted for the M.Tech/M.Tech-PhD/PhD program interview on Nov. 18 2024.(List)
    List of candidates provisionally shortlisted for the Ph.D written/interview on Nov. 18 2024.(List) (Criteria)
    List of candidates provisionally shortlisted for the Ph.D (under the VSS scheme) written/ interview on July 26, 2024.
    Provisionally selected candidates for M.Tech-AI (July-2024) (Through Spot Round).
    Provisionally selected candidates for M.Tech-CSE (July-2024) (Through Spot Round).
    Interview for the Spot Round candidates will be held on 19 July 2024 at 3 PM for M.Tech-AI - Full Time Regular With Fellowship Program (For vacant seats of EWS Category only) for registered applicants of IIT Jodhpur only.
    Provisionally selected candidates for M.Tech-AI (July-2024) (Full time Regular Without Fellowship).
    Provisionally selected candidates for M.Tech-CSE(July-2024) (Full time Regular Without Fellowship).
    Provisionally selected candidates for M.Tech-AI (July-2024) (Cat.-Self Sponsored, Full Time Sponsored, Part Time).
    Provisionally selected candidates for M.Tech-CSE(July-2024) (Cat.-Self Sponsored, Full Time Sponsored, Part Time).
    Provisionally selected candidates for Ph.D program(July-2024).
    Provisionally selected candidates for the M.Tech-Ph.D(CSE& AI)-2024.
    List of candidates provisionally shortlisted for the MTech(AI)
    List of candidates provisionally shortlisted for the MTech(CSE)
    List of candidates provisionally shortlisted for the MTech-Ph.D (CSE & AI) interview on May 8 2024. (Criteria)
    List of candidates provisionally shortlisted for the Ph.D interview on May 7 2024. (Criteria)
    List of candidates provisionally shortlisted for the Ph.D interview under the VSS scheme -2024.
    Accepting applications for Ph.D. program(2024 intake) (Deadline-20/04/24)
    Accepting applications for 2024 intake of M.Tech and M.Tech-Ph.D. programs. (Deadline-20/04/24)
    Advertisement for Admission to Executive M.Tech. Artificial Intelligence Program for Working Professionals. (Deadline-18/12/23)
    Rolling Advertisement for admission to Ph.D. Program. (Program Details) (July 2023 Admissions Timeline) (To Apply)
    Provisionally selected candidates for M.Tech-AI program-2023
    Provisionally selected candidates for M.Tech-CSE program-2023
    Provisionally selected candidates for PhD and M.Tech-PhD program-2023
    Call for admission to M.Tech. and M.Tech.-Ph.D Dual Degree Program. (Details on the programs)(Apply Online: Deadline 20/04/23
    Rolling Advertisement for admission to Ph.D. Program. (Details on the programs)(Deadline for current cycle: 20/04/23 -- Apply Online)
    Call for Summer internships for UG/PG students (Form) (Deadline 20/04/23)
    Rolling Advertisement for faculty positions.
    Call for Applications for Ph.D. in Computer Science and Engineering
    Applications being accepted for Certificate, Diploma and MTech AI for working Professionals.
    Deadline December 05, 2022.[Click to Apply Now] [Click for Details on Programs]
    Dept. of CSE to conduct Winter Schools on Algorithms for Graphs and Games & Responsible AI from December 5-15, 2022
    (Registration deadline: October 30, 2022)
    Applications invited for position of Senior Project Associate- Last Date:18-05-2022. (Advt. No. IITJ/R&D(Advt.)/2022-23/07), (More Details)
    Rolling Advertisement for admission to Ph.D. and M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree Program.(Deadline 08/05/'22, Sem. Start: August-22)
    Advertisement for Summer Internship May-July 2022. (Last Date: 27 Feb)
    Advertisement for Admission to Semester-long Courses in AI and ML (Last Date Extended-28 Dec)
    The Department of CSE invites applications for admission to Executive M.Tech. Artificial Intelligence Program for Working Professionals-Jan 2022 Intake (For Sample Programming Questions- Click Here
    Advertisement for Admission to Executive M.Tech. Artificial Intelligence Program for Working Professionals.
    Ph.D. Admissions, July 2021: Programming/Coding Test.
    Dept of CSE IIT Jodhpur is inviting applications for its M.Tech, M.Tech-Ph.D. and Ph.D. programmes - first semester starting July 2021 - application deadline May 11, 2021.
    The Department of CSE invites applications for faculty positions at all levels
    Dr. Debasis Das is now IEEE Senior Member!
    Dr. Heena Rathore, University of Texas, SA, USA, to talk about "Brain Variable Reward Structure for Cooperative Machine Learning in IoT Network" on March 19, 2021 at 6:00 pm, IST.
    Call for Applications (Registration deadline - March 15, 2021): Advanced Certificate Bootcamp in Cyber Defence by IIT Jodhpur TISC, in collaboration with Whizhack Technologies
    Call for Designs for Department of CSE logo (Deadline - March 15, 2021): Individuals and teams may participate; Certificate and cash prize to be won!
    Rolling Advertisement for admission to Ph.D. and M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree Program
    The CSE Department has an illustrious array of advisors from academia and industry.
    Prof. Richa Singh elected as IEEE Fellow!
    Samsung Digital Academy teams with IIT Jodhpur to set up an AR-VR Innovation lab.
    IIT Jodhpur launches the B.Tech in Artificial Intelligence and Data Sciences
    IIT Jodhpur establishes iHub-Dristi, the Technology Innovation Hub on CV, AR and VR
    IIT Jodhpur Receives First NVIDIA DGX A100 AI Supercomputers In India
    PSA office approves Jodhpur City Knowledge and Innovation Cluster, with IIT Jodhpur as the coordinating institution
    Call for Applications - Internships (May-July, 2021) in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering
    Admissions on! Part-time M.Tech. AI for working professionals: Deadline January 15, 2021


Undergraduate Programs
B.Tech. Computer Science and Engineering (CSE)

The B.Tech. program in Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) at IIT Jodhpur aims to equip its students with skills to undertake careers that involve identifying and engineering solutions for real-world problems, through innovating upon their core competence in computer science. The curriculum gives due importance to the foundational aspects of computer science, as well as aspires to inculcate in students the foresight and expertise to address transdisciplinary technological questions. Students can choose from a number of elective courses that strive to expand their understanding of emerging concepts and processes across domains such as Theory and Algorithms, Hardware, Systems, Network and Security, Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Speech, Vision, Language, and Social Computing.

The program also encourages its students to opt from a number of exclusive interdisciplinary specialization tracks, that are envisaged to provide a coherent and sophisticated understanding of underlying subject-areas, to empower them to pursue myriad career paths. Some of these specializations are:

Visual Computing

Socio-Digital Reality

Advanced Algorithms

Social and Sustainable Computing

Intelligent Communication and Networking

VLSI Systems

The program aspires to produce a well prepared, motivated workforce who would valiantly embark upon careers in research and industry involving innovation, knowledge creation, engineering, and entrepreneurship. All students who have graduated from the department thus far are currently placed in companies of repute or are pursuing higher education in top-tier universities in the country and the rest of the world. 

B.Tech. Artificial Intelligence and Data Science (AI&DS)

Starting 2020, IIT Jodhpur will be offering a unique undergraduate program in Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, that envisions to equip students with the ability to assess societal, health, safety, legal and cultural issues, and - most importantly - identify their consequent responsibilities as engineers of effective solutions for the same.

The curriculum is interdisciplinary at heart - straddling computer science, mathematics, artificial intelligence, machine learning, data science, and their applications across numerous domains. Besides Artificial Intelligence, Deep Learning, Digital Image Processing, Computer Vision and Video Processing, the program will be training its students in a range of exclusive courses like:

Biometrics

Dependable AI

Resource-constrained AI

Big Data

Data Engineering and Data Visualization

Stream Analytics

Social Network Analysis

Human-Machine Interaction

Augmented and Virtual Reality

Speech and Natural Language Understanding

Computational Neuroscience

The curriculum promises to provide opportunities to its students to explore a number of transdisciplinary specialization areas including visual computing, socio-digital reality, intelligent communications and networking, language technologies, robotics, and AIOT. The program will also allow its students to venture into a one-of-a-kind Management specialization that would focus on AI and Technology, leading to an MBA (BTech + MBA dual degree program) and scope for entrepreneurial pursuits 


Postgraduate Programs
M.Tech. Computer Science and Engineering (CSE)

The M. Tech program in Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) at IIT Jodhpur establishes a balance between traditional and emerging areas of the discipline by offering students a combined knowledge of theory and practice. The program is designed to extend the undergraduate computing skills with up-to-date and in-depth expertise in specialized areas of the computer science discipline. The curriculum is developed in consultation with experts from academia and industry to address the needs of both domains and open a wide range of possibilities for students for their future endeavors. Students are equipped with relevant concepts, algorithms, techniques, and underpinning principles while developing the ability to solve real-world problems in a number of application areas such as Computer Systems and Security, Distributed Computing, Internet of Things, Artificial Intelligence, and Big Data. 

M.Tech. Artificial Intelligence (AI)

The M.Tech. in Artificial Intelligence (AI) aims to fill the critical needs of the industry and to fill the gap in the availability of highly skilled AI scientists and engineers. The major goal of the two-year M.Tech. (AI) The program is to impart rigorous training in strong foundations of artificial intelligence as well as cutting-edge AI tools and techniques, and produce graduates who can reinforce the country's efforts towards developing AI technologies. 


Dual Master's with University of Albany, SUNY (UA)

The Dual Mater's Program in CSE and Cybersecurity in collaboration of University at Albany, SUNY (UAlbany). This is a unique program that leverages the strengths of the two institutions, IIT Jodhpur in CSE and UAlbany in Cybersecurity. The field of Cybersecurity is becoming more critical as we become more technology dependent and there is a short supply of Cybersecurity professionals in the United States of the order of a quarter million jobs. Also, the field is growing rapidly. Students will get an MTech in CSE and an MS in Cyber Security.

UAlbany is providing a 5000 dollar scholarship for our students since we are a partner institution. Additionally, this program is STEM certified in the United States which means that students will automatically get a 3-year work visa at the end of their one year at UAlbany. Also, currently there are over a quarter million open jobs in the Cybersecurity. The previous set of students that have gone from IIT Jodhpur (SME), we have had a 100% placement in the industry or at education institutions for doctoral programs with full assistantships. Almost all students have also been able to take assistantships at UAlbany making their education even more affordable.
M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree CSE & M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree AI

IIT Jodhpur has been offering MTech-PhD dual-degree programs since July 2019. These programs have been designed particularly for students with an inclination for research. Students who have completed their B.Tech. are eligible to join this program. Students complete their M.Tech. course work and then start their research, and earn both M.Tech. and Ph.D. degrees - at the end of the program. There are two distinct aspects of these programs: first, it provides an avenue for students to earn both degrees in a far lesser duration compared to if these were done individually, and second, students are awarded a fellowship equivalent to that of a JRF from the date of their joining. Academically, these programs facilitate students to decide upon their area of research by the end of the first semester. After a phase of rigorous coursework in the first two years, they start working towards the academic requirements of a PhD that includes a comprehensive exam, state-of-the-art seminar, publications in top conferences and journals, and a thesis. The students can also work on industry projects and collaborate with faculty from other academic/research bodies. This program offers the benefit of PhD level scholarship from the first year itself and the integrated courses and research helps in reducing the overall time of completing MTech and PhD.

The Department of CSE is currently offering two such programs: MTech-PhD Dual-degree in CSE and MTech-PhD Dual-degree in AI, and is continuously looking for motivated and capable students to conduct advanced research in all areas of Computer Science and AI (please visit the "Research" page for more details). The coursework requirements of these programs are similar to the corresponding MTech programs, and other support (travel support, institute mobility grant, fellowship schemes in addition to that from the Ministry of Education, etc.) and research related academic requirements are similar to the PhD program. 

Executive M.Tech. AI (for working professionals)

From January 2020, the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Jodhpur has started the Executive M.Tech. in AI program for working professionals. This program runs as a combination of synchronous and asynchronous teaching. Online lectures are offered on evenings or weekends for the convenience of working professionals. The minimum duration of this mode of M.Tech. program is 3 years, and the credit requirement is the same as the regular M.Tech in AI program at IIT Jodhpur (i.e. 62 credits). The major goal of this program is to train and enhance the skills of working professionals with strong foundations of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and state-of-the-art AI tools and techniques, and make them more industry-competent. 


Programs for Working Professionals
Introduction

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a branch of computer science that aims to create machines to act with higher levels of intelligence and emulate the human capabilities of sense, comprehend and act. The core problems of artificial intelligence include programming computers for certain traits such as Knowledge, Reasoning, Problem-solving, Perception, Learning and Planning. AI technology development and applications are evolving rapidly with major implications for economies and societies. As the demand for such applications increases, there is also an increasing need for building the future workforce for AI.

From January 2020, the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Jodhpur has started the Executive M.Tech. in AI program for working professionals. From 2022, this program transcends to its stackable avatar (Certificate, Diploma, M.Tech AI)- in line with the New Education Policy 2020 for working professionals. This program runs as a combination of synchronous and asynchronous teaching. Online lectures are offered on evenings or weekends for the convenience of working professionals. The minimum duration of this mode of M.Tech. program is 3 years, and the credit requirement is the same as the regular M.Tech in AI program at IIT Jodhpur (i.e. 62 credits).

The major goal of this program is to train and enhance the skills of working professionals with strong foundations of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and state-of-the-art AI tools and techniques, and make them more industry-competent. For developing the AI ecosystem, this program will be executed in synergy with other M.Tech programs running in IIT Jodhpur, such as Sensors & IoT, Cyber-Physical Systems, and Advanced Manufacturing and Design.
Objectives

This Executive M. Tech in AI program will offer students with deep knowledge of both fundamental AI technologies, as well as application-oriented AI. A student completing this program will be capable to undertake careers in industry as well as academia. He/She will have the option to explore a variety of domains including Manufacturing, Fintech, Healthcare, Agriculture/Food Processing, Education, Retail/Customer Engagement, Human and Robot interaction/intelligent automation, Smart City, Aid for Differently Abled/Accessibility Technology.
Features of the Program

    An initiative to cater to the stackable program ideology of the NEP2020 for working professionals
    Easy stackable option: opportunities to exit or add-on course to graduate to next stage.
    Classes are conducted on the weekends or in the evening of the weekdays in online mode and students attend in a synchronous audio-visual mode.
    The credit requirement per semester is flexible. Students can register for as many courses as they want (satisfying the minimum and maximum credit requirements) every semester
    Program elective and open elective courses may be chosen from a wide variety of courses offered across the departments and schools including Computer Science & Engineering, Electrical Engineering, School of AIDE, Mathematics, Mechanical Engineering
    Industry oriented courses such as ML-Ops and DL-Ops
    Students can interact and ask questions during the lectures.
    Recorded lectures and teaching materials are made available online.
    Course management and discussions will be enabled via widely-used tools such as Google Classroom, Piazza, and Moodle.
    There are mandatory two contact weeks in a semester. Students attend lectures and discussion sessions with instructors, participate in offline evaluations, and experience the IIT environment in person.
    Contact weeks may be organized in remote locations, subject to higher demand.
    Students can do their M. Tech. Projects on state-of-the-art research topics across departments
    Students may participate in projects funded by Government funding agencies and industries.

Expected Graduate Attributes

After completing this programme, a student will be able to develop an ability to:

    Comprehend fundamental concepts and hands-on knowledge of the state-of-the-art AI methodologies.
    Design and Build real-world AI systems for complex planning, decision making and learning, solving application-specific problems, and to reason about them.
    Conceive, Design and Develop Intelligent multi-modal multi-sensory Man-Machine interfaces.
    Design, Develop and Deploy machine learning based applications using structured and unstructured data (e.g., speech, text, images/videos).
    Understand and Assess reliability, dependability and trust-worthiness of AI-based systems.
    Design and develop AI applications for resource constrained environments.
    Adhere to evolving ethics and privacy laws across various domains and territories.
    Plan and manage technical projects.

Learning Outcomes

    Understand the fundamentals of Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Inference Engines, Speech, Vision, Natural Language Understanding, Robotics, and Human Computer Interaction.
    Unify the knowledge of human cognition, AI, Machine Learning and data engineering for designing systems.
    Demonstrate hands-on knowledge of state-of-the-art AI tools for real-world problem-solving.
    Ability to develop real-time and robust AI-based systems with specific software, hardware and data requirements.
    Build solutions to explore fully immersive computer-generated worlds (in VR), and overlay computer graphics onto our view of our immediate environment (AR) along with smart, cognitive functionality.
    Demonstrate advanced skills to comprehend and communicate effectively.
    Carry out projects using intelligent cognitive solutions provided by AI algorithms to get more insights in stakeholder management, risk modeling, intelligent resource scheduling and managing project constraints with intelligent use of data models.

Program Details (Includes Stackable Options From 2022 onwards)

Course Structure for: Certificate, Diploma and Degree program-categories

    Certificate program requires a minimum 6 to 8 credits and 64 hours of contact hours.
    Diploma requires minimum 128 contact hours (around 16-18 credits) 

Certificate and Diploma as part of the stackable MTech AI program

    The certificate and diploma can be obtained as an exit option from MTech AI
    The certificate and diploma can also be registered by the student individually. If the student follows the continuation CGPA requirements, he/she can stack up the credits to earn the next higher degree, finally leading to MTech AI as well.


Doctoral Programs
M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree CSE & M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree AI

IIT Jodhpur has been offering MTech-PhD dual-degree programs since July 2019. These programs have been designed particularly for students with an inclination for research. Students who have completed their B.Tech. are eligible to join this program. Students complete their M.Tech. course work and then start their research, and earn both M.Tech. and Ph.D. degrees - at the end of the program. There are two distinct aspects of these programs: first, it provides an avenue for students to earn both degrees in a far lesser duration compared to if these were done individually, and second, students are awarded a fellowship equivalent to that of a JRF from the date of their joining. Academically, these programs facilitate students to decide upon their area of research by the end of the first semester. After a phase of rigorous coursework in the first two years, they start working towards the academic requirements of a PhD that includes a comprehensive exam, state-of-the-art seminar, publications in top conferences and journals, and a thesis. The students can also work on industry projects and collaborate with faculty from other academic/research bodies. This program offers the benefit of PhD level scholarship from the first year itself and the integrated courses and research helps in reducing the overall time of completing MTech and PhD.

The Department of CSE is currently offering two such programs: MTech-PhD Dual-degree in CSE and MTech-PhD Dual-degree in AI, and is continuously looking for motivated and capable students to conduct advanced research in all areas of Computer Science and AI (please visit the "Research" page for more details). The coursework requirements of these programs are similar to the corresponding MTech programs, and other support (travel support, institute mobility grant, fellowship schemes in addition to that from the Ministry of Education, etc.) and research related academic requirements are similar to the PhD program. 

Ph.D. CSE

The Ph.D. program at the Department of Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) at IIT Jodhpur is postgraduate-research-oriented. A Ph.D. student works in an area of his/her interest under the supervision of a faculty member(s) and also has the flexibility to have an industry expert as co-supervisor. The student has to complete the Ph.D. qualifier requirements, which involve a minimum number of credits by taking courses, a comprehensive exam, state-of-the-art seminar, and research proposal defense. The doctoral program’s salient feature is the independent research work taken by scholars, leading to a thesis at the end of the program. The average duration of a PhD. program is between four to five years.

The CSE department invites students with a "research" bent of mind to apply for admission to the Ph.D. program. The Ph.D. applicant must have high aspiration and willingness to work on socially relevant cutting-edge problems. The department expects that an aspirant has strong foundations in core Computer science subjects. The department offers admission to the Ph.D. program in categories like Full-Time, Part-Time.

Ph.D. Tracks

    MoE Funded Ph.D.
    Ph.D. Funded by Exciting Projects
    Joint Ph.D. (JPD) With SUNY Buffalo (UB)

Broad Research Areas

    AI & ML
    CV, AR-VR
    Systems & S/W
    Theoretical Computer Science

Some Specific Areas of Interest Include: Health Informatics; Social Network Analysis; Cryptography; Computational Social Choice Theory; Parameterized & Randomized Algorithms; Graph Algorithms; Natural Language Understanding; Quantum Computation; VANET; Internet of Things (IoT); Blockchain; Network Security… 

Compute Facilities & Coursework

    Industry focused & research-driven courses
    Industry-supported labs
    Modern high-end GPU clusters including NVIDIA DGX A100, DPU coming
    State-Of-The-Art testbeds in VANET
    Samsung sponsored AR-VR lab
    Opportunity to attend courses from adjunct and visiting faculties from industries and top universities in India and abroad 

Research Opportunities

    Industry-sponsored projects (Meta, IBM, TCS, DRDO, Microsoft, Accenture)
    Projects with government agencies on real-world problems (DRDO, AIIMS, PGI, Law Enforcement)
    Close collaborations with iHub Drishti – a Technology Innovation Hub focused on “Computer Vision, AR & VR”
    Joint projects with IMSc, IIT Bombay, IIT Kharagpur, IIIT Guwahati, IIT Delhi, IIIT Hyderabad, IISc Bangalore, SUNY Buffalo, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
    Missouri University of Science and Technology, IIT Hyderabad, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
    Publications at top venues
    Support for attending conferences
    Student reading groups and webinars by leading experts 

Joint Ph.D. (JPD) with SUNY Buffalo (UB)

Requirements

    Students interested in being admitted into the JPD need to be first selected into the full-time PhD program in CSE at either Institution as per selection procedures of that Institution.
    JPD selection procedures will be initiated within 6-12 months of the student enrolling in the PhD program. Students selected into the JPD program shall be enrolled on a full-time basis at both Institutions.
    Before the student matriculates to UB - as a part of the residency requirement the student must fulfill UB’s minimum academic admission conditions
        UB’s required minimum score in English for language proficiency requirements (i.e. TOEFL, IELTS, PTE, CPE, CAE or DET)
        GATE (or equivalent as specified by MoE, Govt. of India) from India is mandatory.
    While the program specifically admits exceptional students following their completion of an appropriate Bachelor’s degree, it will also admit those who will have completed an appropriate Master’s degree.

Features

    Dissertation will be jointly directed by faculty from both institutions
    Students will be awarded two separate PhD degrees, one from each institution
    Students will need to spend approximately equal time at each institution
    When in residence at UB, scholarship will cover tuition costs and a living allowance (stipend)
    When in residence at IITJ, scholarship will be at par with PhD students at IITJ
    When enrolled as a full-time PhD student at UB, all broad-based fees will be waived off. Covered fees include comprehensive fee, academic excellence and success fee, student activity fee, and international student fee (wherever applicable)
    Students will have access to funding for research costs from the laboratory where research is being conducted

Faculty Profiles
Mayank Vatsa
 About:

Mayank Vatsa is a Professor at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur, a Fellow of IEEE and IAPR, and a member of the National Academy of AI (USA). His research focuses on Artificial Intelligence, with an emphasis on Generative AI, Responsible AI, computer vision, and biometrics. He is a recipient of India's prestigious Swarnajayanti Fellowship and the IEEE Meritorious Service Award (2023). He serves as Co-Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE Transactions on Biometrics, Behavior, and Identity Science, a journal he led the efforts to establish during his tenure as Vice President of the IEEE Biometrics Council. He has also held senior roles at premier conferences like AAAI, CVPR, ICCV, IJCB, and FG. Dr. Vatsa has contributed in several of India's key technology initiatives, contributing to UIDAI (Aadhaar) standards, DigiYatra, the NITI Aayog 'Responsible AI for All' policy, national biometric standards, and the formation of the Technology Innovation Hub at IIT Jodhpur.

Richa Singh 
 About

​D​r. Singh is a Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur. She earned her Ph.D. in Computer Science from West Virginia University, USA. She is a globally recognized leader in artificial intelligence and machine learning, with a focus on pattern recognition, biometrics, medical image analysis, and Responsible AI. Her contributions to the field have been recognized with the highest distinctions, including being named a Fellow of the IEEE, IAPR, and Indian National Academy of Engineering (INAE). She is also an ACM Distinguished Member and a member of the National Academy of AI (USA). A prolific researcher, Prof. Singh has authored over 400 publications in top-tier venues, which have garnered more than 16,200 citations (h index: 71). Her research program has attracted external grants exceeding Rs. 56 crores. She holds editorial leadership roles, serving as the Founding Co-Editor-in-Chief of ACM AI Letters and the Associate Editor-in-Chief of the prestigious Pattern Recognition Journal. Prof. Singh's work has demonstrated profound real-world impact. Her face recognition technology was instrumental in the challenging task of identifying victims of the Balasore train accident, while her deepfake detection systems were deployed to ​p​revent the​ spread of misinformation ​i​n India's 2024 general elections. Her contributions have been honored with numerous awards, including the Nasscom AI Gamechangers Award and the Facebook Award for Ethics in AI. She has supervised 14 Ph.D. students to graduation (14 ongoing PhDs) and guided over 200 M.Tech and B.Tech students. She has a strong record of service to the academic community, notably serving as the Program Committee Chair for CVPR 2022, becoming the first researcher from India to hold this position in the conference's 40-year history. She regularly serves in leadership roles for premier conferences such as ICCV, ECCV, AAAI, and major biometrics venues.

Debasis Das 
 About:

Dr. Debasis Das is currently working as an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering and Associate Faculty at the School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science (AIDE), as well as Coordinator of IoT and Applications (Inter-disciplinary Research Platform (IDRP) at Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India. His research interests include Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks (VANETs), Blockchain, the Internet of Things (IoT), Machine Learning (ML), Artificial Intelligence (AI), and Quantum Technology. Dr. Das published 170 research papers in top international journals( Like IEEE Transactions, ACM Transactions, etc) and top B/A/A* Conferences. Dr. Das has 23 sponsored projects and 2 consultancy projects to his credit. He has been awarded the Early Career Research (ECR) Award, BRICS Young Scientist Award, Young Researcher Award-2024, DST-NSF Project Award 2025, NSTC Research Project Award 2025 from Science & Engineering Research Board (SERB), Department of Science & Technology (DST), MoE, NSF, and NSTC, respectively. He has many research collaborations with premier institutions in India and different universities across the globe. He has been engaged in different academic activities inside and outside the Institute. He has supervised 10 Ph.D. students, and 10 are currently pursuing their theses. He has also supervised more than 50 M.E./M.Tech. thesis. He is a senior member of IEEE and VTS and a professional member of ACM.

Dip Sankar Banerjee 
 About:

Dr. Banerjee is curently working as an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering of IIT Jodhpur. His research interests are broadly in the areas of high performance computing, big data analytics, accelerated computing, and computer architectures. Previously he was a post-doctoral researcher at the Network Based Computing Laboratory of The Ohio State University where he worked under the mentorship of Prof. Dhabaleswar K. Panda. Before that, he completed my Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) from International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad in 2014 where he worked under the guidance of Dr. Kishore Kothapalli. He was a part of the Center for Security, Theory, and Algorithmic Research (CSTAR) laboratory. His PhD research was broadly in High Performance Computing where he worked towards developing novel algorithms and implementations for heterogeneous computing platforms that could utilise multiple multi-core and many-core processors at the same time leading to better performance and higher system efficiency. 

Anand Mishra
 About

Anand Mishra serves as a faculty member in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering. He leads the Vision, Language, and Learning Group (VL2G) at IIT Jodhpur, which focuses on problems at the intersection of vision and language. Specifically, the group is focusing on video understanding, efficient vision and language models and multilinguality. Anand has made significant contributions to the field through influential resources and systems, including the IIIT-5K and OCR-VQA datasets, as well as IndicPhotoOCR, an open-source OCR system for Indian language text in natural images. His research group has received support through various industry and government of India grants, including Microsoft Academic Partnership Grant (2021 and 2023), MeitY Grant on National Language Translation Mission, a research grant from HealthcareNLP, a Gift Grant from Accenture, and a Start-up Research Grant from SERB, Govt. of India. Anand is an active reviewer for top-tier computer vision, language and AI venues, and his reviewing contributions have been recognized with Outstanding Reviewer Awards at ICCV 2021 and CVPR 2023. He served as Program Co-Chair for ICVGIP 2025 and is currently serving as an Area Chair for CVPR 2026 and ECCV 2026.

Angshuman Paul 
 About:

Angshuman Paul is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Computer Science & Engineering at IIT Jodhpur. His research primarily focuses on the development of deep learning techniques for the synthesis and analysis of medical images, aiming to advance affordable healthcare solutions. Prior to joining IIT Jodhpur, he served as a postdoctoral fellow at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), USA.

Hardik Jain
 About

Since March 2025, Dr Jain is an assistant professor at the CSE department of IIT Jodhpur. In June 2025, Dr Jain, recevied DST INSPIRE Faculty Fellowship Grant for five years. Before joining academics, he was in industrial research at Hitachi Rail, Berlin for little over two years. There Dr Jain led R&D projects dealing with digitalization in the railway domain, including a patent in Digital Twin. For his PhD at Technical University Berlin, he worked on Deep Learning Mesh Parameterization of 3D Shapes for various applications. During his PhD, he developed 3D data registration softwares for medical instrument manufacturing companies. His focus areas include 3D Computer Vision, Edge AI, VR/AR Visualization amongst others.

Mohit Kumar Jangid
 About

I am Assistant Professor at IIT, Jodhpur in the department of Computer Science and Engineering. I graduated with Ph.D. with Cybersecurity in the department of Computer Science and Engineering at The Ohio State University (OSU) in Summer 2024. My advisors are Dr. Zhiqiang Lin and Dr. Yinqian Zhang. I graduated from Malaviya National Institute of Technology, Jaipur (MNIT) with the Bachelor in Technology of Computer Engineering in 2013. My Bachelor theis project was supervised by Dr. Manoj Singh Gaur.

 I am interested in research areas of Automated Formal Verification, System Security and Privacy, Trusted Execution Environment, Cryptography and Protocol Design.

Romi Banerjee 
 About

Romi Banerjee, is an Assistant Professor, in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) - Jodhpur, an alumnus of the Diverse Intelligences Summer Institute (DISI), and part of the digital-curator team for the Society of Neuroscience of Creativity. She is also affiliated with the Centre of Education Technology and the Centre for Brain Science and Application - IIT Jodhpur.

It has been a while that she has been trying to understand and model how we do what we do and why we do what we do, towards the design of embodied, social (~empathetic) "thinking machines / systems". She draws inspiration from studies on the origin, evolution and development of fundamental cognitive abilities (e.g. attention, experience-formation, language acquisition, aesthetic-sense, time-space continuum, spontaneous thought, contemplation, wisdom, etc.) across all living species.

Lately, she has begun exploring EdTech solutions for embodied learning, Digital story-telling for heritage preservation, Human-AI co-creation, and Socio-cultural biases in AI.

Projects 
Demand-Aware Rooftop Solar Mapping and Installation Optimization with Limited Satellite Data and Model Debiasing
A compact non-invasive device for monitoring neonatal jaundice in pre-during and post-treatment conditions
Developing a network digital twin of a self-optimized virtualized network for 5G and beyond
Fast and Accurate LiDAR Point Cloud Forecasting for Autonomous Navigation Tasks
Exploration of Parameterized Approximation Algorithms for Constrained Clustering and Covering
Towards Secure and Resilient Collaborative Autonomous Driving CoAD
Enhancing Hardware Security and Throughput in Vision Tasks
Development of Automated Software Platform for InSolare Process Optimization Using Image Processing and Machine Learning
Open Access Interactive Storytelling Project on the Manasamangal Kavya
Sustainable and Robust Near-Memory Accelerator for Vision Transformer based Models
Design and development of few-shot multi-class recognition model over data suffering from label corruption in a semi-supervised setting
Complexity of Manipulative Attacks on Resource Allocation
Automated Counting of Pipes from Camera Images
Self-supervised learning of dynamic clothed avatars
Development and Maintenance of Project Management Information System
Development of Bias Mitigation Approaches for Fair Deep Learning
Realtime Computer Vision and Sensing
Data Annotation and Marketplace
Analogy Based Visual Relationship Interpretation from Cross-Task Videos and Standard Operating Procedures
Computationally Lightweight Convolutional Neural Network for Generalizable Chest X-ray Diagnosis
Detecting Behavioral Health Disorders of Older Adults using Self- supervised Learning and Casual Reasoning
Swiggy Face Recognition
OCR's an Application in Indian Languages
ConSenseHAR: Decentralized collaborative context sensing towards pervasive Human Activity Recognition
AI-driven Robot-assisted Cardiac Ultrasound System to Acquire Clinically Useful Standard Echocardiographic Views
Large-scale Multi-label Learning with Limited Compute Resources
TrustMe: Explainable Adversarial Attack Detection and Mitigation for Object Recognition Algorithms
Inventorization of the wildlife towards a sustainable campus.
Non-invasive Diagnosis of Coronary Artery Disease using miRNA and Coronary Imaging.
FIST Infrastructure Support
Non-invasive estimation of core body temperature, heart-rate and blood-oxygen saturation level to classify healthy and non-healthy individuals
Social Distance Alert and Monitoring System Using Smartphone, IOT and AI
AI Driven Estimation of COVID-19 Prognosis using Multimodal Data
AI-driven Diagnosis of COVID-19 using X-ray Images
Detecting Spoofing and Digital Attacks on Face Images
Design and Development of Indigenous On-board Autopilot and Vision-based Navigation Systems for Autonomous Flight of Hover Capable Rotary-wing Vehicles
Knowledge Discovery from Images containing Text and its application to Audio-Visual Dialogue
Smart Health Solutions for Rapid Mass Diagnosis for COVID-19
Mitigating Adversarial Perturbations in Deep Learning - SwaranaJayanti Fellowship
Development of Application oriented AI Systems
Development of An AI platform for Human Health
Detection and Prevention of Forged Obscene Images/Videos in the Social Networks using Machine Learning - A Social Media Engine for Discovering Doctoring in Obscene Multimedia
Algorithms for Facial Recognition System Under Disguise
Forecasting COVID-19 spatio-temporal disease spread patterns and establishing predictive factors through the analysis of large data inconclusive/repeat tests and associated testing data
Digital Representation Generation for Efficient Retrieval of Bangla Document Images in Digital Libraries


Sponsors & Collaborators

The department is committed towards improving the institute’s outreach through all phases of technology development; starting from conceptualization down to commercialization, and thereby striving towards creation of knowledge in specialized domains. The Department’s mission is to develop strong and sustainable partnerships with research laboratories, academic institutions, industry, and entrepreneurs in order to meet aspirations of the faculty & student communities.

The department is looking forward to working on problems that throw up intellectual challenges, and demand practical and impactful applications and solutions. Besides this, technology development initiatives and exploration of an idea, related to process and design improvement, are also of considerable interest. The department seeks partnerships that recognise and capitalize on relative strengths of academia and the industry. To achieve these goals the department is focusing on:

    Development of strong industry collaborations in research, and specialized human resource development.
    Identifying and protecting intellectual property.
    Development and and nurturing of international linkages for research and development.


Compute Resources

The department's compute resources include a number of powerful servers and workstations, designed to handle a wide variety of computational tasks including complex data analysis, machine learning, and high-performance computing. With their advanced hardware and capabilities, these resources provide researchers and students to the department with reliable and efficient computing power, enabling them to tackle complex problems and push the boundaries of their fields.

DGX-2 Server: NVIDIA designed the DGX-2 Server as a high-performance computing system for deep learning applications. It features 16 interconnected GPUs that provide high-speed data throughput for massive machine learning and artificial intelligence operations. The DGX-2 is also endowed with NVIDIA's Tensor Cores, which accelerate matrix operations commonly employed in deep learning tasks. One DGX-2 machine with 16 Volta 100 GPUs and 1.5 terabytes of RAM is available in the CSE lab. It comes equipped with an additional 50 terabytes of storage that is all flash-based.

DPU-GPU HPC: This architecture combines DPUs and GPUs in order to accelerate high-performance computing tasks such as deep learning, scientific simulations, and data analytics. DPUs are specialized processors designed for data movement and security tasks, whereas GPUs are designed for computationally intensive tasks like matrix operations. DPU-GPU HPC systems can accomplish high throughput and low latency by combining the two, making them suitable for a variety of applications that require large-scale data processing and analysis. The department will have this system shortly. Each system will have 128 GB of RAM and 2 Nvidia A30 GPUs.

Other GPU Systems: The department has 16 Nvidia 1080Ti GPU and 1 Nvidia A5000 GPU cards for the department users. NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 It is a graphics card that is often used in deep learning applications due to its powerful CUDA cores and high memory bandwidth. It has 3584 CUDA cores and 11 GB GDDR5X memory with a memory bandwidth of 484 GB/s. NVIDIA A5000 is based on the latest NVIDIA Ampere architecture and features 8,192 CUDA cores, 256 Tensor Cores, 64 RT Cores, 24GB GDDR6 with error-correction code (ECC) and a 384-bit memory interface.

General purpose servers: The department has several servers that are used for various purposes, including web hosting, database management, and file storage. These servers are equipped with powerful CPUs and storage, making them suitable for handling large amounts of data and serving multiple users simultaneously.


Welcome to the Department of Electrical Engineering

The Department of Electrical Engineering primarily focuses on imparting quality education and preparing students to face future technological challenges. The vision of the Department is to enhance the research environment and to innovate in pedagogy to address the challenges of socio-economic and human resource development.

The Department is committed to engage in high-quality research by Faculty Members and Students, and in the pursuit of excellence in teaching. The Department offers B.Tech. in Electrical Engineering with broad range of major and minor specializations and three state-of-the-art M.Tech. programs in Sensors and Internet of Things (SIoT), Cyber Physical Systems (CPS), and Intelligent Communication Systems (ICS).

The Department also runs dual degree (M.Tech. + Ph.D.) programs in Intelligent Communication Systems, Sensors and Internet of Things (SIoT) and Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) as well as Ph.D. program with a broad range of specializations covering detailed aspects of Microelectronics, Signal Processing, Communication, Microwave & Photonics, Power systems, Control systems etc. The Department is also starting a new Executive MTech Program in Intelligent VLSI Systems (for working professionals) from July 2022.

The prospective undergraduate and postgraduate students are encouraged to visit the Academic Programs (UG Program, PG Programs and Doctoral Programs) page of the Department to know more about the details of courses offered in the department.

To know more about the current research themes of the faculty members, the prospective students are encouraged to visit the Research Overview page of the Department. Technology Tracks currently pursued by the Department include emerging and challenging fields that culminate at the intersection of several traditional research areas.


News & Newsletter

Sr. No. 	Description
1 	Result of Ph.D. Admissions AY 2025-26 Semester II
2 	Consolidated (year-wise) cutoffs of last four years
3 	The merit list of candidates shortlisted for Ph.D. Admissions, 2nd round, AY 2025-26 Semester-I
4 	The Merit List of Candidates Shortlisted For Ph.D Admissions (AY 2025-26 Semester-I JULY 2025)
5 	The Merit List of Candidates Shortlisted for M. Tech. Admissions (AY 2025-26 Semester-I )
6 	M.Tech. CPS Admissions 2025
7 	Shortlisted Candidates for Ph.D. Interview AY 2025-26 SEMESTER I
8 	Open House for PhD Admissions
9 	Nishant Kumar: Represented India at the 9th BRICS Young Scientist Forum held in Sochi, Russia, from 25–29 November 2024
10 	Harshit Agarwal: Appointed Chair, IEEE EDS Technical Committee on Compact Modeling for 2025-2026 2. Member BoG, IEEE EDS 2024-2026 3. Organized snap circuits hands on training for school children
11 	Amandeep Kaur: Editorial Board Member, Scientific Reports
12 	Invited Talk: Abhishek Sharma has Delivered an invited talk on Millimeter-Wave Interconnects for Extreme Temperature Applications
13 	Ph.D. admission for Academic Year 2024-25 Semester-II
14 	List of recommended for Ph.D AY 2024-25 SEMESTER II December 2024
15 	Dr. Nishant to represent India in the BRICS Young Scientist Forum 2024
16 	Dr. Amandeep Kaur Nominated to Editorial Board of Scientific Report
17 	List of shortlisted candidates for Ph.D Interview AY 2024-25 Semester II Dec 2024
18 	News from old website 


Undergraduate Program

The vision of the Department is to develop a world class teaching and research atmosphere by excelling in fundamental knowledge and applications of Electrical Engineering through curricular and co-curricular activities. To accomplish this, the department offers an undergraduate program in the broad discipline of electrical engineering, with embedded capability-linked specializations, for enabling the  students to pursue a chosen career path. The 4 year B.Tech program provides the core electrical engineering concepts ranging from circuit analysis and design, computing, control, communication, signal processing, and power engineering. To equip the students with the essential knowledge and problem solving skills, the curriculum provides strong foundations in basic sciences. In addition, the engineering design component is integrated throughout the structure, motivating and familiarizing students with real-world engineering challenges. Additional problem-solving skills and practical experiences are developed through design projects and state-of-the-art laboratory experiments. The structure enables the students to shape their curriculum at various stages. This includes opting for a department specialization, transition to 5-year B.Tech. and M.Tech. Dual Degree program, an additional minor in relevant areas such as Entrepreneurship.


Salient Features of the UG Programs

    New broad-based curriculum and flexible program structure
    Balance of theoretical foundations, hands-on, and experiential learning
    Emphasis on design-oriented thinking, creativity, and life-long learning
    Capability-linked Minor, Interdisciplinary, and Department-specific Specializations
    Skillset targeted towards emerging technologies like 5G & Beyond Communication, Industry 4.0, & Smart City Technologies
    Prepares students to compete effectively in a world of rapid technological advancements
    Option to pursue entrepreneurship & industry collaboration through engineering innovation
    Startup ecosystems to translate ideas into business models (Tinkering Lab, Technology Innovation & Startup Center (TISC), & Research Park)

Expected Graduate Attributes

    Strong understanding of fundamentals of mathematics, science and engineering with emphasis on electrical technologies for Communication, Signal Processing, Devices & Circuits, Computing Systems, Control Engineering, and Power Engineering
    Ability to apply technical skills to identify, formulate, and solve complex problems encountered in modern electrical engineering practices
    Ability to model, analyze, design and experimentally evaluate electrical components or systems that achieve desired technical specifications, subject to certain resource constraints
    Ability to compete effectively in a world of rapid technological advancements and assume leadership roles within academic, industrial, or entrepreneurial environments in the broad context of electrical engineering
    Foundations for critical thinking that are needed to broaden their careers in diverse disciplines through minor/graduate-level studies and the process of lifelong learning
    Ability to recognize and practice professional ethics in working environment
    Ability to acquire new knowledge and apply it as needed


Learning Outcomes

    To acquire knowledge of electrical engineering principles along with the required understanding of computing, engineering fundamentals, mathematics, and science
    To apply the concepts of mathematics, sciences and engineering (including computing science) necessary to analyze and design complex electrical and electronic circuits and systems containing hardware and software modules
    To gain in-depth understanding of concepts of Signals, Devices, Circuits, Systems, Machine Learning, Programming, Control, Communications, Hardware Design and related interdisciplinary topics
    To create, select, and apply appropriate techniques, resources, electrical engineering design and computing tools to solve complex engineering problems with an understanding of the limitations through laboratory exercises and design projects
    To perform literature review and patent landscaping for innovative research
    To adapt to work in multidisciplinary environment
    To understand professional ethics and social responsibilities
    To communicate effectively
    To engage in independent and life-long learning in the context of technological advancements.
    To conduct product design or entrepreneurial activities


BTech (4 Years)

This program is designed to provide students a basic exposure to Engineering with focus on the various domains of Electrical Engineering. These domains have been broadly divided into following areas: Communication, Computing Systems, Control Engineering, Devices and Circuits, Signal Processing, and Power Engineering. The program aims to connect academics to current emerging technologies and industrial requirements in these domains. 

The program also encompasses rigorous experimental components along with global standard courses comparable to top most universities. The program is also flexible enough to provide students options to shape the curriculum according to their interest.  Students having inclined interest in any specific area as specified above can opt for relevant specialization. 
BTech with Specialization (4 Years)

The curriculum offers flexibility to students for pursuing capability-linked specializations of their choice. The department specializations are designed to enable students to lead technological innovations addressing the emerging industrial and societal challenges in various domains of electrical engineering. The EE students can opt for any one of the departmental specializations as mentioned below. The in-depth understanding and technical skills acquired through these specializations will enable graduates to play a vital role in advancement of technologies such as 5G/6G communications, smart cities, smart healthcare, and Industry 4.0. Students with research inclination also have options for  5-year B.Tech. and M.Tech. Dual Degree program. 

Department Specializations (Click on the respective links to know more about these specializations)

 Cyber Physical Systems 

 Communication Engineering

 Intelligent Communication and Networking

 Visual Computing

 Socio-digital Reality

 Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT)

 VLSI Systems

 Nano and Flexible Electronics

 Smart Grid

 Engineering Innovation
BTech with Minor (4 Years)

The institute also offers a 4-year B.Tech. program with minors in Entrepreneurship or Management or interdisciplinary specializations. Such a flexible curriculum enables students to pursue diverse career goals by choosing the curriculum based on their interests.Students will also have an opportunity to opt for a B. Tech. - Master’s dual degree in their chosen specialization or minor area. The curriculum also offers numerous options that enable students to gain industrial experience through collaborative industrial projects at industries and entrepreneurship experience at the Institute's incubation centre.


BTech-MTech Dual-degree (5 Years)

A B.Tech. student having opted for major/minor specialization with CGPA 6 or more at the end of the seventh semester and fulfilling minimum credit requirements may be allowed to switch to B.Tech.- M. Tech. dual degree program in the chosen specialization at the beginning of the eighth semester. The M.Tech degree can be any one of the approved programmes of the institute. All requirements of M.Tech. Degree will be applicable to all such students. 

 B.Tech-M.Tech Dual Degree in SIoT

 B.Tech-M.Tech Dual Degree in CPS


BTech-MBA (5 Years)

IIT Jodhpur also provides options to BTech students to earn a Tech-MBA degree via a transition program. Students having inclination towards business can opt for this dual-degree program at the start of 5th semester. This program offers a range of specializations such as  Business Analytics, Cyber Security, Financial Engineering, Technology Consulting, Technology Product Management.

The Tech-MBA is a reflection of the growing demand for business leaders to have an exposure in various technological fields such as artificial intelligence (AI), fintech and robotics.  Tech-MBA is a new wholesome program totally focussing on the tech sector such as digital finance, data analytics and AI, as well as digital transformation. The aim of such a program is to enable students to apply their tech expertise within a business context. The program focuses on covering important aspects of corporate strategy analysis of top tech companies, like Amazon, Google, and tech-centric companies, such as start-ups in addition to business strategy. The economics and operations are going to be introduced with strong emphasis on the digital economy and supply chain in e-commerce companies respectively.


Postgraduate program
The Department of Electrical Engineering offers following Post Graduate Programs

Master of Technology Programs

    M.Tech. (Intelligent Communication Systems)
    M.Tech. (Cyber Physical Systems)
    M.Tech. (Sensors and Internet of Things) 
    M.Tech. (Intelligent VLSI Systems)  and Executive M.Tech Program in Intelligent VLSI Systems
    M.Tech. (MicroElectronics & VLSI)  (Download file): 94.2 KB


Master of Technology - Doctor of Philosophy (M.Tech.-Ph.D.) Dual Degree Programs

    M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Intelligent Communication Systems) 
    M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Cyber Physical Systems) 
    M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Sensors and Internet of Things) 


Doctoral Program
PhD Program at Department of Electrical Engineering

The Department of Electrical Engineering offers PhD in a wide range of emerging and challenging research areas of electrical engineering and allied interdisciplinary areas of communication engineering, RF, microwaves & photonics, control engineering, power engineering, signal processing and computing systems, and microelectronics & VLSI. The areas can also be mapped with the current technology tracks of the Department that include 5G and Beyond Communication, Signal Processing & Interpretation, Cyber-Physical Systems, Nano-electronics & Integrated Circuits, Smart Grid, Embedded systems & SoC, and Artificial Intelligence & Internet-of-Things (IoT). Please visit Research Overview to know the associated research areas, laboratories, and faculty members associated with each technology track and research area.

Our PhD students are trained to conduct high-quality cutting-edge research demonstrated through tangible deliverables, and to publish in top ranking journals and conferences. Specially-designed courses on technical communication and Intellectual Property Rights enable students in quality expression as well as patent landscaping for potential IP and business translation of their work. Weekly colloquium enables the students to keep open avenues of sharing ideas and learning from peers. Students have round-the-clock access to high-end research and computational facilities, and also have the opportunity of one additional year of fellowship after thesis submission to engage in translational and entrepreneurial initiatives arising out of their PhD work. On graduation, our doctoral students are trained in critical thinking, research, development, operations and management of emerging technological challenges for both industry and academia.

Faculty Members
Bharat Singh Rajpurohit
 About

 Prof. Rajpurohit is a dynamic academician and researcher adept at Renewable Energy and Power Electronics Application to Power Systems. Prof. Rajpurohit has expertise in the area of Power Electronics application to Power Systems, Future Electricity Networks, Grid Integration of Renewable Energy, and Power quality. Prof. Rajpurohit has published papers in reputed journals and conferences. He has conducted many short-term courses and workshops. He has both academic and industrial experiences with leadership quality thus, can manage academic as well as project-related activities. Prof. Rajpurohit has more than 15 years of involvement with the energy sector in various capacities: graduate-level teaching in energy, research, and industrial experience.

Deepak kumar M Fulwani
 About

Deepak Fulwani received the Ph.D. degree in control systems from the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Bombay, Mumbai, India, in 2009. He was an assistant professor at IIT Guwahati, Guwahati, India, and served as a visiting faculty at IIT Kharagpur, Kharagpur, India. He is currently a professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur, Jodhpur, India. He has authored or coauthored several articles in reputed international journals and conferences. His current research interests are power electronics, microgrids, and control systems. Prof. Fulwani was a guest associate editor for a special issue on structured DC microgrids for the IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power Electronics in 2017. He was an associate editor for IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications from 2019 to 2022. He is currently an Editorial Board Member of Nature Scientific Reports and Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics since June 2024. He was the recipient of the Excellence Award for his Ph.D. thesis work in the IDP program in Systems and Control in the 48th Convocation of IIT Bombay. He was also awreded Teaching Excellence Award (for class size 30 to 60) by IIT Jodhpur in 2020

Mahesh Kumar
 About

He has received INSA Medal for Young Scientists-2014 by Indian National Science Academy, the MRSI Medal-2016 by Materials Research Society of India, DAE-Young Achiever Award-2016 during Solid State Physics Symposium, Research Excellence Award 2020 by IIT Jodhpur and Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel Research Prize by The Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, Germany. He is recipient of the NAWA ULAM-2024 fellowship by Polish National Agency for Academic Exchange, Brain Pool Program-2022 by Korean National Research Foundation, Fulbright-Nehru Academic and Professional Excellence Fellowships-2021; The Royal Society International Exchange Award-2021; JSPS Invitation Fellowship-2021, PIFI Visiting Scientist fellowship-2021 by Chinese Academy of Science; Duo-India Professor Fellowship-2020, Bhaskara Advanced Solar Energy Fellowship-2018 and INSA-DFG International Bilateral Exchange Award-2015. Recently INAE awarded him Abdul Kalam Technology Innovation National Fellowship 2022. He is also Editorial Board member of Nanotechnology, IEEE Sensors Journal, Bulletin of Materials Science and Nano Express. He is also Fellow of Royal Society of Chemistry and Institute of Physics. He is founding Member and served as Chair of Indian National Young Academy of Sciences. He published more than 200 research articles. His research interests are focused on 2D materials, Nanomaterials, Sensors, Semiconductor materials and devices

Sandeep Kumar Yadav
 About

Dr. Sandeep Kumar Yadav is a Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering at IIT Jodhpur. He holds a Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering and an M.Tech. in Nuclear Engineering and Technology from IIT Kanpur, and a B.Tech. in Electrical Engineering from H.B.T.I. Kanpur. His research interests include signal processing, condition monitoring, blind signal demodulation, image processing, artificial neural networks, and machine learning. He has led several funded research projects in collaboration with agencies such as DRDO, IBM, UNICEF, DST, and MHRD. Dr. Yadav has received numerous accolades, including the Young Scientist Award (System Society of India, 2011), the Graphical System Design Achievement Award (National Instruments, 2012), the IBM Shared University Research Award (2014), and the Teaching Excellence Award from IIT Jodhpur (2020). He regularly teaches undergraduate and postgraduate courses such as Signals and Systems, Digital Signal Processing, Intelligent Instrumentation, Machine Learning, Adaptive Signal Processing, and Circuit Theory. He is actively involved in mentoring Ph.D. and M.Tech. students in emerging areas of intelligent systems and signal analysis.

Shree Prakash Tiwari
 About

Shree Prakash Tiwari is currently working as Professor in Department of Electrical Engineering. Prior to joining IIT Jodhpur as a faculty member in 2011, Prof. Tiwari had worked as a Postdoctoral Fellow in School of ECE at Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA, for 3 years (2008-2011). He had done his Ph.D. from EE Department, IIT Bombay from 2003 to 2008, during which he had also worked at NTU Singapore for about 7 months. Prof. Tiwari is a Senior Member of IEEE and serves as selected member of technical committees on “Flexible Electronics and Displays” and “Electronic Materials” of IEEE Electron Devices Society. Prof. Tiwari was Visvesvaraya Young Faculty Research Fellow of Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India, for 2018-2023. He was part of Indian Delegate to attend Indo-German Frontiers of Engineering Symposium in Bremen, Germany (2022) organized by Alexander von Humboldt Foundation and Department of Science and Technology, followed by CONNECT Follow-up Programme Award by Humboldt Foundation and IGSTC-CONNECT Plus Award to visit and work in Germany in 2023. At IIT Jodhpur, he leads the Flexible Large Area Microelectronics (FLAME) Research Group, with focus towards biodegradable electronics. He was recently conferred with “Institute Award for Research Excellence-2024, Senior Researcher Award (Engineering)” from IIT Jodhpur. He has co-authored over 160 research articles, including more than 80 in journals of high repute with many in IEEE, ACS, and Wiley Journals

Aashish Mathur
 About

Aashish Mathur (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree (Hons.) in electronics and instrumentation engineering from the Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS) Pilani, Pilani, India, in 2011, the M.Tech. degree in telecommunication technology and management from the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Delhi, New Delhi, India, in 2013, and the Ph.D. degree in power line communications from the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Delhi, in 2016.

He was a Software Engineer with Intel Technology India Pvt. Ltd., Bengaluru, India, briefly before joining IIT Delhi for his Ph.D. in 2013. He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur, Jodhpur, India. He has also worked as an Assistant Professor with the Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, BITS
Pilani and the Department of Electronics Engineering, IIT (BHU) Varanasi, Varanasi, India. He was engaged as a Visiting Faculty with the Indian Institute of Information Technology Kota, Kota, India, for the second semester, from 2018 to 2019. He served as an Adjunct Faculty (part-time) with IIT Delhi from 2019 to 2022 and 2022-2025. His research interests include visible light communications, free-space optical communications, power line communications, and physical layer security.

Dr. Mathur received the Best Student Paper Award for his co-authored paper in 2017 Conference on Decision and Game Theory for Security (GameSec 2017), Vienna, Austria. He was awarded the Early Career Research Award by the Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India, in 2019. He was awarded the Teaching Excellence Award at IIT Jodhpur in 2019. He was recognized as an Exemplary Reviewer 2021 for IEEE Transactions on Communications and IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society for 2024. He is serving as an Associate Editor of IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society.

Amit Bhardwaj
Amit Bhardwaj received his PhD degree from the Department of Electrical Engineering at IIT Bombay in June 2016. From June 2016 to January 2017, he was a research associate at IIT Bombay, Mumbai. From February 2017- December 2017, he was an Alexander von Humboldt postdoctoral fellow at the Chair of Media Technology, Technical University of Munich, Germany. After that, he joined the Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea as a postdoctoral researcher. Currently, he is working as an associate professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering, at IIT Jodhpur. He has research experience in the area of virtual reality and multi-sensory human perception.

He has published his research work in top journals and conferences in the area of haptics and robotics. He has also published a book in the area of perception

Arun Kumar Singh
 About

Arun Kumar Singh (M'14-SM'20) received the M. Tech. degree in Communication and Radar engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India, in December 2002 and the Ph.D. degree in Electronics and Communications from the Télécom Paris (also known as École Nationale Supérieure des Télécommunications), France, in February 2012. He is an Associate Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, which he joined in 2013. Earlier, from April 2003 to January 2009, he worked as a scientist at Space Applications Centre, Indian Space Research Organization, India, where he was part of the system engineering team for communication and navigation satellite payloads. From May 2012 to April 2013 he was a research engineer at the Mobile Communications Department, EURECOM, France.

Ongoing Projects 
A Programmable CMOS image sensor for high speed, low power and low noise applications (Funded)
A Robust Visual Positioning System
Achieving Collaborative Missions via Distributed Coordination and Control of Autonomous Multi-Vehicle System
AI/ML, IoT, and Wireless Practice Advisory
An endoscopic camera system (Approved)
An Interdisciplinary study of Technologically Manipulated Information: Its ecosystem and its psycho-social impact
Animatable Human 3D Surface Reconstruction from Partial 3D Scans
Compact Modeling and Simulations of Nano-Scale Devices 	Ha
Data-driven Haptic Modeling and Rendering of Normal Interactions on Inhomogeneous Viscoelastic Deformable Objects
Design and Development of NavIC Receiver
Design and Development of Substrate Integrated Waveguide (SIW) and Empty SIW (ESIW) Based RF-Microwave Components
Design, fabrication and characterization of all-fiber Multimode Interference (MMI) devices for generating highly pure Laguerre-Gaussian (LG) modes in free-space
Development of Cognitive Cyber-Physical System (C2PS) testbed
Development of low cost sensors for monitoring of odours in ambient air
Development of System to Mitigate Second Order Harmonic Ripple in AC/DC Microgrid using Advanced Control Techniques
Establishment of AI-Based Platform to Monitor and Identify Smell Taste and Key Covid19 Erapeutic Hotspots
Experimental Investigation and Performance Evaluation of HARQ Technique for Free-Space Optical Communication Systems
Experimental Investigation and Performance Evaluation of Visible Light Communication Systems
Gate All Around Steep Slope Transistors
Haptic Camera: Inter-relationship between Different Sensing Modalities for Textured Surfaces
Haptics Based Medical Simulator for Abdomen Palpation and Pulse Behavior
High Performance Low Voltage Flexible Organic Field-Effect Transistors for Circuit and Sensing Applications
Hub and Spoke Consortia for e2W and e3W Electric Drives-Design Development of Prototyping of Advanced IM and Synchronous Reluctance Drives and Vehicle Integration for e2W and e3W Applications
Human perception driven on-chip compression for power efficient CMOS image sensors (Approved)
Investigation on Planar Horn Antenna using Substrate Integrated Waveguide (SIW) Technology
Object Based Spatial 3D Audio Rendering for Augmented and Virtual Reality Applications
Perception-Theoretic Approach for Quantifying Robustness of Machine Learning Models
Photometry based Biomedical Analyzer
Point of use and in-line coliform sensors for smart water management
Real-Time 3D Scene Reconstruction and Localization of Autonomous Ground Vehicles in Unknown Environments
Reflection Symmetry Based 3D Surface Reconstruction and Restoration from Partial Point Cloud
Secure and Robust Coordination and Control of Autonomous Multi-Vehicle Systems with Desired Constraints
Special Manpower development Program for Chips to System Design (SMDP-C2SD)/ Design of a Sensor Signal Conditioning System (I) & Multiprocessor Scheduling Alogrithms using Control Theoretic Approach (II)
Substate Integrated Coaxial Line (SICL) based Circuits and Systems for Millimeter Wave Application
Telepresence and Teleaction System for Robot Assisted Dentistry
Unified Modeling and Design of High Voltage Transistors

Completed Projects 
Noise-enhanced Edge-preserving Image Denoising using Stochastic Resonance 	Rajlaxmi Chouhan, 
Design and Development of Midrange(>=10 km) RF Transceiver system to transmit Nuclear Radiation Sensor Data
Design and Development of Tunable RF Filters based on Ferroelectric Thin Films by Sputtering
Modification of electron and hole transport layers for High Efficiency Perovskite Solar Cells
Computationally efficient fixed complexity sphere decodes for multiuser MIMO communications
Development of Tunable RF Filter Based on Ferroelectric Thin Film by Sputtering 	
Ion-Beam Synthesis and Characterization of Gallium Nitride based Nanocrystals embedded in Si based Matrices for New-Generation Photodetector and Light-Emitter Applications
Algorithms for Blind Signal Detection and Demodulation
Development of MEMS Based Gas Sensors using RF Sputtered Transition Metal Dopen ZnO Nanostructures
Encapsulation of Organic Devices by Atomic Layer Deposition (DRDO CAR Proposal)
Reproductive Child Health
Development of Metal Doped TiO2 Low Dimension Structures by Sputtering for Gas Sensing Applications
Enabling Technologies for Integlligent Wireless Sensor Network for Health and Environment Monitoring
Developing Dielectric Semiconductor Combinations and Processes for Flexible Organic Electronics
Development of Programmable Emulator for Photovoltaic Plant to Facilitate Complex Testing Requirements


Collaborations
Faculty Members of the Department of Electrical Engineering are keen to collaborate with individuals from academia, R&D laboratories and industry in India and abroad, in areas of mutual interest. Some of the current collaborations are as follows:
collaborations	Research group at IIT Jodhpur is developing compact models for SPICE circuit simulation in collaboration with UC Berkeley.
collaborations	With Carleton University, a joint research on Signal Integrity and Power Integrity is going on, actively. Further, one of our faculty members is an Adjunct Faculty Member at Carleton University.
collaborations	With TIMA Laboratory, a collaboration is on design of high-speed ICs and on-chip noise/jitter modeling.
collaborations	This collaboration focuses on Cooperative Control of Passivity-Short Systems. Passivity is defined as an input-output behavior of a dynamical system and closely related to the principle of energy conservation. In practice, however, most of the systems are not well behaved and possess a shortage of passivity (or non-passiveness) in their operation. The scope of this collaboration deals with the analysis and synthesis of the networks comprising the passive-short systems.
collaborations	With NTNU, IIT Jodhpur is actively involved in research related to mitigating the challenges in physical layer security of communication systems and improving the performance of free space optical communication systems.
collaborations	This collaboration focuses on Macromodeling and EDA Algorithm development for VLSI systems. A PhD student is being jointly supervised by faculty members from both the institutes.
collaborations	This collaboration focuses on Secure Coordination and Control of Multi-Agent Systems. The collaboration is a part of the NM-ICPS Technology Innovation Hub (TIH) in Robotics and Autonomous Systems proposed by IISc, Bangalore. The scope of collaboration includes designing distributed guidance and control strategies for the multivehicle network systems for their secure and robust coordination and control against malicious adversaries.
collaborations	There are collaborations among multiple groups of IIT Jodhpur and IIT Delhi. These collaborations involve (i) The performance analysis of 5G and beyond communication systems and exploring the ways of improving physical layer security (ii) Data processing and machine learning for the sensors data (iii) Detection of breast cancer through optical techniques (iv) Implementation of mmwave antennas for 5G test bed user equipment
collaborations	Research group at IIT Jodhpur is working in collaboration with IIT Kanpur for the characterization and modeling of advanced semiconductor devices, measurement of microwave and mmwave antennas and circuits.
collaborations	With IIT Mandi, research on high-speed system design and noise modeling in VLSI systems is going on. There is a PhD student jointly supervised by faculty members from both the institutes.
collaborations	The collaboration with IIIT-MK is on Neuromorphic Circuits and Systems.
collaborationscollaborationscollaborationscollaborationscollaborations	IITJ is collaborating with these institutions for the design and development of an indigenous dual frequency NavIC receiver. IITJ work includes design and development of baseband signal processing algorithms for correlator receivers that perform signal acquisition, code and carrier tracking, control lock detection, accumulated delta range computation and data demodulation. These algorithms would be translated to digital ASIC based correlator hardware by IIT Bombay, IIT Madras, IIST Thiruvananthapuram, SAMEER. ISRO is providing required technological know-how for various aspects related to system engineering for NavIC receivers. 


Research Overview
The research areas pursued by faculty members of the Department of Electrical Engineering can be broadly categorized as follows. Please click on the respective groups to know about their research and associated labs.
 If you wish to browse Research Areas mapped to the Technology Tracks of the Department, please click on the respective Tracks below to view the research themes, associated research groups, labs and faculty members for each technology track.

Additionally, faculty members from the Department are engaged in challenging interdisciplinary research in collaboration with faculty members across various departments and discplines through the Institute's Interdisciplinary Research Platforms (IDRPs).
Research Themes

    Rate, reliability and complexity limits in MIMO communications
    Performance improvement and security of Optical Wireless Communications
    Millimeterwave antennas and circuits for 5G application 
Research Themes

    Sociodigital Reality (AR, VR, Haptics, Speech and Language Analysis)
    Visual Computing (Computer Vision, Visual Forensics, Machine Learning)
    Signal Processing for IoT (Predictive Maintenance, Digital Twin, Communication) 
Research Themes

    Multi-agent system
    Mechatronics & cyber-physical systems
    Robust & optimal control
    Adaptive control & robotics
    Electric vehicles
Research Themes

    Multi-agent system
    Oxide metal semiconductors by sputtering for sensor applications
    2D materials: MoS2, AlGaN/GaN HEMTs
    Bandgap engineering and surface studies of semiconductors
    Micro and Nano device fabrications
    Organic and Flexible Electronics: Field-effect transistors (FETs), Circuits, and Sensors
    Electrical characterization, Parameter extraction, Interface characterization
    Device Simulation: New and Unconventional Devices
    Compact Modeling for Circuit Simulations
    CMOS image sensors
    Analog and mixed-signal circuits
Research Themes

    Control of micro-grid & uncertain system
    Demand-side management
    Microgrid Control and dynamics of distributed generation
    Condition monitoring
Research Themes

    High-speed VLSI Systems and EDA tools
    Signal Integrity
    Neuromorphic Computing
Research Themes

    Communication protocols for RF energy harvesting-based systems
    Chipless RFID
    Signal Processing for IoT (Predictive Maintenance, Digital Twin, Communication)
    Visual Computing (Computer Vision, Visual Forensics, Machine Learning)


Welcome to the Department of Mathematics

Mathematics, being the basis of many disciplines, is a subject that evolves with time and creates new theories to solve real-world challenging problems. Our department has been taking a leading role in developing new methods to model such situations that can be used in diverse areas of computer science, engineering, and basic sciences. The department has faculty with research interests in the areas of Algebra, Mathematical Physics, Scientific Computation, Numerical Analysis, Partial Differential Equations, Topological Dynamics, Low Dimensional Chaos, Dynamical Systems, Renormalization in Low-dimensional dynamics, Wavelet Analysis, Fractional Transform Theory, Image Processing, Financial Risk Analysis, Categorical Data Analysis, Reliability Theory, Applied Probability.

We are excited to offer high-quality programs at postgraduate level for students who wish to apply math to science or engineering such as a two-year M.Sc. program in Mathematics, a four-year M.Sc-M.Tech program in Mathematics-Data and Computational Sciences, a two year M.Tech program in Data and Computational Sciences. We also offer an M.Tech-Ph.D. dual degree program in Data and Computational Sciences and a Ph.D. Program with specialization in different areas of Mathematics to those who wish to earn a deeper understanding of pure and applied Mathematics. 

From the Head of the Department
Welcome to the Department of Mathematics!!

The Department of Mathematics is dedicated to advancing the fields of pure mathematics, applied mathematics and statistics. Our vision is to emphasize both the fundamental principles of core mathematics and the foundational concepts essential for analyzing key principles applied in cutting-edge technologies. Since its establishment, the department has been actively engaged in research across various critical areas of mathematics and computing.

The department also aimed to explore modern aspects of mathematics coupled with computational capabilities to develop a workforce specialized in mathematical aspects of key technologies. With this inclination, the department initiated academic programs to address the mathematical needs of both industry and academia. Currently, we offer various programmes, namely, a two-year M.Sc. program in Mathematics, a four-year M.Sc-M.Tech program in Mathematics-Data and Computational Sciences, a two year M.Tech program in Data and Computational Sciences....


Announcement

Sr. No. 	Description
1 	Ph.D. Admission Results Semester-II, AY 2025-26
2 	List of provisionally shortlisted candidates for Ph.D. entrance examination for Semester II of 2025-26
3 	The Merit list of Provisionally Shortlisted Candidates For Ph.D. Admissions in Mathematics Semester-I, AY 2025-26, Round -02
4 	List of Candidates, Reporting details, Syllabus for Ph.D. Entrance Examination, Semester I of 2025-26 Round 2
5 	Apply Online For PhD Admissions 2025-26 Semester-1 Round 2
6 	Merit List of Provisionally Shortlisted Candidates for Ph.D. Admission in Mathematics (Semester I, AY 2025-26) Round-1
7 	THE MERIT LIST OF CANDIDATES PROVISIONALLY SHORTLISTED FOR M.Tech (DCS) ADMISSIONS IN AY 2025-26
8 	List of Candidates, Reporting details, Syllabus for Ph.D. Entrance Examination, Semester I of 2025-26
9 	Apply Online For PhD Admissions 2025-26 Semester 1 Round 1
10 	Provisionally Shortlisted Candidates for Ph.D. Entrance Examination For Semester II of 2024-25
11 	The Merit List Of Candidates Provisionally Shortlisted For Ph.D Admissions Ay 2024-25 Semester I Mathematics Round - 2
12 	Provisionally Shortlisted Candidates for Ph.D. Entrance Exam (Round 2) on 9th July 2024
13 	The Merit List Of Candidates Provisionally Shortlisted For M.Tech (DCS) Admissions in Ay 2024-25
14 	View all Latest Announcement from old website 


Undergraduate Programs


Minor Program in Data Science

The Department of Mathematics offers a Minor Program in Data Science (DS) from July 2020. The minor program is offered to all the  B.Tech. students of the institute except the students enrolled in B.Tech.(CSE), B.Tech.(AI&DE) and B.Tech.(EE) programs. The program facilitates the study of a multidisciplinary field that makes extensive use of statistics, predictive modeling, and machine learning without changing its application, irrespective of the domain. The main objective of specialization in Data Science is to equip students with the fundamental concepts, approaches, and methods in data science. The curriculum includes courses in mathematics, machine learning, artificial intelligence, and their applications in various domains.Upon the completion of the minor, students will develop critical and logical thinking to solve problems in data science and further will be able to use appropriate technology that aids their problem-solving and data analysis.


B.Tech in Artificial Intelligence and Data Science (AI&DS)

The Department of Mathematics offers a Minor Program in Data Science (DS) from July 2020. The minor program is offered to all the  B.Tech. students of the institute except the students enrolled in B.Tech.(CSE), B.Tech.(AI&DE) and B.Tech.(EE) programs. The program facilitates the study of a multidisciplinary field that makes extensive use of statistics, predictive modeling, and machine learning without changing its application, irrespective of the domain. The main objective of specialization in Data Science is to equip students with the fundamental concepts, approaches, and methods in data science. The curriculum includes courses in mathematics, machine learning, artificial intelligence, and their applications in various domains. Upon the completion of the minor, students will develop critical and logical thinking to solve problems in data science and further will be able to use appropriate technology that aids their problem-solving and data analysis. 

Postgraduate Programs

While the classical aspects of mathematics are providing foundations for the analysis of key principles behind such modern and emergent technologies, modern aspects of mathematics coupled with computational capabilities are opening new avenues for further explorations. The M.Sc. (Mathematics) and M.Tech. (Data and Computational Sciences) Programs at IIT Jodhpur aims at tapping these opportunities by developing workforce specialized in mathematical aspects of key technologies. The Department of Mathematics hosts the following post-graduate degree Programs, namely:
(a) 	M.Sc. (Mathematics) Program,
(b) 	M.Sc.- M.Tech. (Mathematics & Data Science) Program, 
(c) 	M.Tech. (Data and Computational Science) Program,   (Download file: 994 KB) and
(d) 	

M.Tech.- Ph.D.  (Data and Computational Science) Program   (Download file: 994 KB)


Doctoral Program


The Department of Mathematics hosts the Ph.D. degree Program. The Ph.D. Program at the Department of Mathematics, IIT Jodhpur is offered with the objective of tapping unique opportunities by evolving both motivated researchers in the frontline areas and a well-trained workforce in the form of teaching faculty. The Program strives to provide a vibrant environment to nurture the knowledge and interpersonal skills of the students in pursuit of developing a well-trained workforce. Further details about the doctoral program can be seen here   (Download file: 263 KB).

The selected candidates shall go through course works as per the institute's regulations and then a comprehensive exam will follow for which syllabus can be found here   (Download file: 89 KB).


Curriculum
The Department of Mathematics offers the following degree programs, namely:
(1)	 Ph.D. (Mathematics)
(2)	 M. Tech-Ph.D. Dual Degree (Data and Computational Sciences)
(3) 	 M.Tech. (Data and Computational Sciences)
(4)	 M.Sc-M.Tech (Mathematics-Data and Computational Sciences)
(5)	 M.Sc (Mathematics)
(6)	 Minor in data science
(7)	 B.Tech (System Science) Discontinued from 2015


Regulations
1. INTRODUCTION
The aim of the M.Sc. Program is to develop graduates having
good knowledge and research training in emerging areas of natural
sciences. IIT Jodhpur has organized the Masters of Science Program in
domains of three Departments of the Institute. These Programs are:
(1) M.Sc. (Chemistry),
(2) M.Sc. (Physics), and
(3) M.Sc. (Mathematics).
The M.Sc. Program is based on three tenets of (1) Semester System, (2)
Credit System, and (3) Relative Grading. This document sets out the
procedures and requirements of the said Programs of study at IIT
Jodhpur.
2. ACADEMIC SESSION
Each academic year (July to June) consists of two academic
semesters. Each semester is for about sixteen (16) weeks with one week
of recess for students, making it about 15 working weeks in each
semester. Excluding the days of the examinations, the total number of
days of instruction in a semester is at least 70. Normal schedule of
these semesters is given in Table 1.
2.1 Academic Calendar
It gives the exact dates of all important events during the
Academic Session, such as orientation, registration, commencement of
classes, adding and dropping of courses, submission of documents,
examinations, submission of grades, conversion of Incomplete I-
grades, vacation, mid-semester recess. This calendar shall be approved
by the Senate.

3.2 Selection Procedure
Admission will be made based on technical performance at the
written examination conducted by JAM and/or interview. The
concerned Departments may shortlist applicants with a proven academic
record based on a cut-off of the JAM score card.
All applicants, who are offered admission, will be informed by
the concerned Departments. Candidates whose selection is approved
by the Chairman, Senate, will be admitted to the M.Sc. Program at IIT
Jodhpur after paying the prescribed fee for the Program.
3.3 Supervisor Allocation
Students admitted to the M.Sc. Program, shall be allocated a
Supervisor during the second Semester of their program at IIT
Jodhpur. The Supervisor identification will be based on the research
interest of the student and the availability of a Faculty Member willing
to supervise such a work.
3.4 Reservation Policy
The norms of reservation for different categories shall be
adopted as laid down by the Ministry of Human Resource Development,
Government of India.
6
3.5 Non-degree Program
A non-degree student is one, who is registered for a degree in a
recognized Institute or a University in India or abroad, and who is
officially sponsored by that Institute or University to complete a part of
her/his academic program at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose, the non-
degree student may carry out research, take courses for credit or
otherwise, and/or may use other academic facilities. An official
transcript of work done at the Institute along with grades obtained, if
any, would be given to the non-degree student concerned for her/his
use as she/he may deem appropriate. But, any credits earned at the
Institute, by a non-degree student, cannot be applied for any degree
program of IIT Jodhpur at any time thereafter. A person can be
admitted as a non-degree student on a duly sponsored application to
the Coordinator (Academics), who will recommend admission on the
advice of AC to the Chairman, Senate, for approval. A non-degree
student may be admitted for a maximum period of one year. The
strength of non-degree students in any program should not be more
than 25% of the program strength. A non-degree student will be
required to pay all applicable fees depending upon the status,
program, and nationality. Such students will be governed by all rules,
regulations and discipline applicable to regular students of the
Institute.
3.6 Cancellation of Admission
Students admitted provisionally or otherwise to any program
shall submit copies of their mark sheets, provisional certificates, etc., of
the qualifying examination and other documents by the last date
specified for the purpose in the Academic Calendar. The Senate
reserves the right to cancel the admission of any student, if
(a) she/he fails to submit the prescribed documents demonstrating
her/his minimum academic qualification for admission, by the
specified date or to meet other stipulated requirement(s); and
(b) it is found (at any time later) that the student had provided some
false information or suppressed relevant information while seeking
admission.
7
3.7 Fulfilment of Admission Requirements
Admission to M.Sc. Programs requires that the applicant be
eligible, go through the laid-down admission procedure, and pay the
prescribed fees. All admissions to the M.Sc. Programs should be
formally approved by the Senate.
(a) Course Work
M.Sc. students are required to undergo coursework at the
Institute, offered either by the Departments with which the M.Sc.
student is associated or by any other Department (in case of
Electives). The minimum number of post-graduate level courses,
which the M.Sc. student should meet to complete the coursework
requirement is 10. Normal load per Semester is 5 courses. An M.Sc.
student is required to complete a minimum of 60 credits of which
30 credits will be through course work over first two semesters,
and 30 credits through Thesis work over the last two semesters.
(b) Thesis Submission
After completing the coursework, M.Sc. students will be
involved in one year of active research towards their M.Sc. Thesis.
The Thesis Examination shall be coordinated by the Supervisor and
at least two other Faculty Members from the Institute nominated
by the Supervisor and approved by the Coordinator (Academics). The
Supervisor will be solely responsible for the grading of her/his
M.Sc. student’s Thesis to be “acceptable” or “not acceptable”, with
letter grades S and X respectively.
4. COURSEWORK REQUIREMENTS
4.1 Academic Load
Each course is given a weightage called credits. The number of
credits of each course is based on the number of contact hours for
lectures, tutorials, and practicals. A typical post-graduate course is of
3-4 credits. Credits will be assigned to the courses based on the
following general pattern:
(a) One credit for each lecture class of 50 minutes;
(b) One credit for each tutorial class of 50 minutes; and
(c) One credit for each laboratory or practical class of three hours.
8
4.2 Registration
Students are required to register each semester for the courses
as per the Program, on the dates specified in the Academic Calendar.
After the successful completion of the required courses, a M.Sc. student
must continue to register in the following semester till she/he submits
her/his Thesis.
4.3 Registration Procedure
A list of courses to be offered in the next semester will be
announced online by the AC. Students shall pre-register for courses.
The registration procedure involves
(a) Online filling of the registration form with courses proposed to be
credited in the semester;
(b) Payment of fees and clearance of outstanding dues (if any); and
(c) Signing of the registration roll at the office of the coordinator of the
department hosting the M.Sc. Program.
A fresh student joining the Institute, who is awaiting the final
results of the qualifying examination, is allowed to register
provisionally on submission of a certificate from her/his last Institute
stating that she/he has appeared in the final examination of the
qualifying degree. The student is required to submit documents of
having passed the qualifying examination by the last date given in the
Academic Calendar for the registration to be regularized.
4.4 Late Registration
If for any compelling reason, like illness, a student is unable to
register on the day of registration, she/he can register before the late
registration date of registration specified in the academic calendar. If a
student seeks prior permission to register late on other valid grounds,
Chairman, AC, may allow late registration. Beyond the date of late
registration, no student will be allowed to register. In special cases, the
final decision will rest with the Senate.
4.5 Adding and Dropping of Courses
A student may add or drop course(s) within one week of the
beginning of the semester or the last date(s) specified in the Academic
Calendar. For this, the student must fill the appropriate form, get it
9
endorsed by the Instructor of the course being added, and submit the
same to the AC. No permission is required to drop a course.
4.6 Cancellation of Registration
Absence for a period of four or more weeks during a semester
shall result in automatic cancellation of the registration of a student
from all the courses in that semester.
4.7 Minimum Credit requirements
An M.Sc. student shall be declared to complete her/his credit
requirements if she/he has earned the minimum number of credits as
shown below in Table 3.

5. TEACHING AND EVALUATION
5.1 Teaching
(a) Medium of Instruction
The medium of instruction of all courses shall be ENGLISH.
(b) Approval of Courses
Each course along with its weight in terms of credits is
approved by the Senate. Only approved courses may be offered
during any semester/summer-term.
(c) List of Courses
The list of courses to be offered in a M.Sc. Program is finalized
before the beginning of the semester, by the department hosting
that Program.
(d) Conduct of Courses
Each course shall be conducted by the Faculty Member with the
assistance of required Teaching Assistants, as required. The Faculty
Member is responsible for conducting the course: teaching in the
class, holding the examinations, evaluating the performance of
students, awarding the grades at the end of the semester, and
10
submitting the grades to AC within 72 hours of the completion of
the final examination.
(e) Teaching Assignments
Prior to each semester, the Head of the department hosting the
M.Sc. Program shall request the faculty members for providing a
list of courses being floated by faculty members of the department.
The Head of department shall hold a meeting of all its faculty
members to identify names of faculty members offering the courses
of the next semester.
(f) Auditing of Courses
A student may audit any number of courses beyond the
prescribed minimum number of courses. Students wishing to audit
a course shall seek the consent of the Instructor of the course being
audited. No grade will be awarded to students auditing a course;
the Instructor may require such students to submit all homeworks
and term papers during the semester just like the students, who are
crediting the course.
5.2 Attendance Requirements
A student should have full attendance in each course. Unless
the student takes leave of absence for valid reasons, the student has to
attend every lecture, tutorial, or lab session. If a student is absent
without any reason, the Instructor would send him a warning by
email. If the student’s attendance falls below 80% then the Instructor
will notify the Academic Section and a letter will be sent to the
student’s parents. If the student still does not attend the classes
regularly, then the Instructor can deregister the student from the
course. Once a student is deregistered from a course, that course will
not show up in the grade-card of the student.
5.3 Evaluation
The performance of students in a course is evaluated in a
continuous basis, using their interaction in the classroom, and
performances in examinations, the laboratory work (if any), and term-
papers and projects.
11
(a) Schedule of Examinations
Each course shall have two mid-semester and one end-semester
examinations; the mid-semester examinations shall be of 60
minutes duration and the final examination of 180 minutes. The
weightages of elements of evaluation in different courses are listed
in Table 4.

(b) Make-up Examinations
No make-up examinations are admissible for any reason. But, if
a student fails to appear in any examination (two mid-semester and
one end semester examinations) for a genuine reason (such as
illness), she/he may make a request to AC for a make-up
examination within two days of the date of the scheduled
examination; a certificate shall be furnished from the Medical
Officer of the Institute Health Center, when illness being the reason
for absence from the examination. In such cases, the marks
obtained in the other elements of evaluation shall be prorated for
the examination missed. When two examinations are missed in a
course, the prorating is done for only one examination; the marks
in the other examination shall be taken as zero.
5.4 Grading System
(a) Grades and Grade Points
At the end of the semester, a student is awarded a relative letter
grade in each course by the Instructor offering the course
considering the performance of the student during the semester
with respect to those of the other students registered in the course.
Five regular letter grades, namely A, B, C, D and F shall be
awarded in each course for M.Sc. students. Each letter grade is
associated with a numerical equivalent on a 10-point scale (called
12
Grade Point) shown in Table 5. The grades shall be submitted to the
AC within 72 hours after the end semester examination.
A student is awarded ‘I’ grade in a course, when the student
fails to appear in the end-semester examination for a genuine
reason. The student shall appear for a make-up examination within
the first week of the next semester and seek to convert the ‘I’ grade
into one of the regular grades, at least one day before the last date
of add drop in the next semester. Any ‘I’ grade remaining after this
date shall be converted automatically into an ‘F’ grade.
An M.Sc. student securing a D grade in any of the courses will
have to either repeat the course (if the course is a compulsory
course) or repeat/substitute it with another relevant course (if the
course is an elective course).
(b) Change of Grade Already Awarded
A letter grade once awarded shall not be changed under any
circumstances. Only in exceptional circumstances, the Senate may
allow the required change.

5.5 Grade Point Averages
The Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) is a weighted average
of the grades earned by a student in all the courses credited by
her/him and reflects her/his academic performance in the respective
13
semester. If the grade points associated with the letter grades earned
by a student in N courses registered during a semester are G1, G2, …
GN, and the corresponding credits C1, C2, … CN, then the SGPA is given
byN
NN
CCC
GCGCGC
SGPA 

 ...
...
21
2211
The Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) indicates the overall
academic performance of a student in all the courses registered up to
the latest completed semester. The CGPA is computed in a similar
manner as the SGPA, considering all the courses in all semesters.
5.6 Grade Card and Transcript
A Grade Card shall be issued to each student at the end of each
semester, and a Transcript at the end of the M.Sc. Program.
6. TERMINATION
6.1 Termination from M.Sc. Program
A student may be terminated from the M.Sc. Program by
Senate, if the student
(a) is absent without authorized leave of absence for a major part of the
semester and does not appear in the end-semester examination of
the courses in which she/he is registered,
(b) fails to report and register by the last date of registration without a
bona fide reason,
(c) violates the code of conduct, involves in ragging, etc., as confirmed
by a special Institute committee,
(d) does not earn the prescribed minimum number of credits within a
maximum of 2 years from the date of registration, including all
leaves of absence.
6.2 Appeal against Termination
A student, who is terminated from the M.Sc. Program, can
appeal for reconsideration to the Chairman, Senate. In the appeal, the
student is expected to give reasons for poor academic performance
and/or why the termination should be reconsidered. The Senate shall
14
take a final decision after considering all the available inputs. But, the
Senate will not entertain any further appeal for review, unless
substantial additional information is brought to its notice.
7. LEAVE
Application for leave of absence should be addressed to the
Chairman, AC, and submitted with a medical certificate, if applicable.
Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval of the AC.
Applications for all kinds of leave must be submitted well in advance
of the date of commencement of the leave requested. Student’s absence
from the Institute without sanctioned leave will entail loss of financial
assistantship for the period of absence and in extreme circumstances
may also result in the termination from the respective M.Sc. Program.
7.1 Short Leave
M.Sc. students are entitled for vacation leave up to a maximum
of 15 days per Semester in addition to Public Holidays. Vacation leave
not availed in a Semester will be carried over to the next Semester up
to a maximum of 15 days. Leave of absence during the semester shall
be discouraged for all registered students. For bona fide reasons, the
student may also be allowed casual leave for up to 5 days per semester.
M.Sc. students may be granted medical leave, duly supported
by a medical certificate, up to a maximum of 15 days per year. Such
leave shall not entail any loss of financial assistantship. Special Leave
to attend Seminars and Conferences in India or abroad to present
research papers, with the recommendation of Supervisor(s), is
admissible.
7.2 Temporary Withdrawal / Semester Leave
Normally, a student is not allowed to withdraw from the M.Sc.
Program temporarily and is expected to complete the program without
a break. But, for genuine reasons and/or in exceptional circumstances,
a student may be allowed to withdraw temporarily on leave of absence
at the discretion of AC and/or Senate for an extended period. Such
leave of absence(s) shall ordinarily not exceed one semester with or
without break during the entire period of the M.Sc. Program. Absence
15
for a period of four or more weeks in any semester will result in
automatic withdrawal from all courses in that semester.
A student who remains on authorized leave of absence due to
ill health, is required to submit on return a certificate from a Registered
Medical Practitioner to the effect that she/he is sufficiently cured and
is fit to resume her/his studies. The student will be allowed to register
only when AC is fully satisfied of her/his state of health.
7.3 Permission to Proceed to other Institutions
To help students to broaden their horizons and gain
course/work experience, she/he may be permitted to proceed to other
academic institutes in India or abroad as a non-degree student. The
following guidelines and procedures apply for this purpose:
(1) Eligibility: A student may be allowed to spend up to one semester
and/or one summer terms in any academic
institute/university/industry of repute in India with prior
permission of AC, if the student has:
(i) Completed the minimum course work requirement at IIT
Jodhpur; and
(ii) No ‘F’ grade in any course.
(2) Procedure: The student shall make an application to AC through the
Supervisor and Head of the Department hosting the program,
giving details of the proposed visit, and shall submit a statement of
purpose with sufficient information about the
institute/university/industry where she/he has chosen to spend
time as a non-degree student. The AC will examine the student’s
request. On the recommendation of the AC, the Senate may
approve the proposal and grant permission, with leave of absence,
to the student to proceed as a non-degree student to the selected
institute /university/industry.
16
8. REQUIREMENTS FOR GRADUATION
A student is deemed to have completed the requirements for
graduation, if she/he has met the requirements laid down in Clauses
8.1 to 8.4.
8.1 Minimum Duration of Residence
The minimum duration of residence shall be 2 years from the
date of registration, excluding the periods of leaves of absence, from
the date of registration. Under no circumstances should students be
permitted to spend more than 5 semesters to complete the course work
and 8 semesters for the total programme, including the Thesis work,
from the date of registration to the programme.
8.2 Academic
An M.Sc. student is said to have completed the course work
requirements, if she/he satisfies the criteria laid down in Sections 4,
5.3, and 5.4. The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the
academic requirements if she/he has earned the minimum credits as
per Table 4. Further, the student should have earned at least a C Grade
in the minimum number of courses to be completed by her/him. In
case a student earns a D grade in any of the compulsory course, she/he
has to repeat the course.
8.3 Payment of Fees and Dues
The student shall pay all admissible fee and dues, and seek a No
DUE CERTIFICATE from the Institute, on completion of the Academic
Requirements.
8.4 No case of Disciplinary Action
The student shall not have any case of indiscipline pending
against her/him.
8.5 Award of Degrees
A student, who completes all the graduation requirements
specified in Clauses 8.1 to 8.4, is recommended by the Senate to the
Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate degree in
the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the
BOG accords its approval.
17
8.6 Withdrawal of Degree
Under extremely exceptional circumstances, where gross
violation of the graduation requirements is detected at a later stage, the
Senate may recommend to the Board of Governors withdrawal of a
degree already awarded to the student.
9. AMENDMENTS
Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the
Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the right to modify/amend without
notice, the curricula, procedures, requirements, and rules pertaining to
its M.Sc. Programs.

1. INTRODUCTION
The aim of the Ph.D. Program is to develop graduates having
good knowledge and research training in classical and emerging areas.
IIT Jodhpur hosts Ph.D. program in all areas of technology,
engineering, sciences, and humanities and social sciences. The Ph.D.
Program is based on three tenets of (1) Semester System, (2) Credit
System, and (3) Relative Grading. This document sets out the procedures
and requirements of the said postgraduate Programs of study at IIT
Jodhpur. The Ph.D. program will be administered by a duly
constituted Academic Committee (AC), through the office of
Academics.
2. ACADEMIC SESSION
Each academic year (July to June) consists of two academic
semesters. Each semester is for about sixteen (16) weeks with one week
of recess for students, making it about 15 working weeks in each
semester. Excluding the days of the examinations, the total number of
days of instruction in a semester is at least 70. Normal schedule of
these semesters is given in Table 1.

2.1 Academic Calendar
It gives the exact dates of all important events during the
Academic Session, such as orientation, registration, commencement of
classes, adding and dropping of courses, submission of documents,
examinations, submission of grades, conversion of Incomplete I-
grades, vacation, mid-semester recess. This calendar shall be approved
by the Senate.
4
3. ADMISSIONS
The process of admission to the Ph.D. Programs offered by the
Institute normally is underway during March-April for Semester 1 and
during November-December for Semester 2. The Institute admits
students to the doctoral degree Programs in three categories, namely:
(a) Regular Full-Time Ph.D. Program
Students admitted in this category shall not be a registered
student in any other academic program in India or abroad, and
shall not be a full-time or part-time employee of any organization
in India or abroad. The students shall be eligible for financial
assistance in the form of Teaching Assistantship or Research
Assistantship as per norms of the Institute, or Scholarship or
Fellowship as per norms of the funding agency, e.g., UGC, CSIR,
DBT, NBHM and DST-INSPIRE.
(b) Part-Time Ph.D. Program
Students admitted in this category shall be a full-time employee
of a recognized Institute, University or Organization. The student
shall not be eligible for any financial support, and needs to get
her/his application forwarded by her/his employer. The student
shall complete the minimum course and residence requirements at
IIT Jodhpur; she/he can undertake research at a location other than
the Institute.
(c) Sponsored Ph.D. Program
Students admitted in this category shall be a full-time employee
and sponsored by Industry, Organization and National Laboratory
equipped with research facilities and recognized by Department of
Science and Technology (DST). The student shall not be eligible for
any financial assistantship from the Institute. The student shall be
allowed to carry out a part or all of her/his research in the parent
Industry, Organization or National Laboratory, under the
supervision of a Supervisor from IIT Jodhpur and a Co-Supervisor from
the parent Industry, Organization or National Laboratory. The Co-
Supervisor should have an earned Ph.D. Degree herself/himself in
an area related to the proposed research work of the student.
Students with Masters Degree earned from a University or an
Institute abroad also are eligible to apply for the Ph.D. program.
5
3.1 Eligibility for Admission
The eligibility criteria prescribed in this section are the absolute
minimum.
3.1.1 Ph.D. Program in an Engineering discipline
(1) Applicants with a Master’s degree in Engineering, namely M.Tech,
M.E., M.Sc. (Engineering) or MS with at least 60% marks or at least
6.5/10 Cumulative Performance Index (CPI) or Cumulative Grade
Point Average (CGPA). Such students are required to have at least
60% marks or 6.5/10 CPI or CGPA in Bachelor’s degree.
(2) Applicants with a Master’s degree in Sciences with at least 70%
marks or at least 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA with a valid GATE, CSIR,
UGC or NBHM score card. Such students are required to have 70%
marks or 7.0/10 CPI or CGPA in Bachelor’s degree.
(3) Applicants with a Bachelor’s degree in Engineering with
(a) a B.Tech, B.E. or B.Sc. (Engineering) degree with at least 80%
marks or at least 8/10 CPI or CGPA and a valid GATE score,
and
(b) a B.Tech. degree from any of the IITs with at least 8/10 CPI or
CGPA with a valid GATE Score Card; and
(4) Applicants with Master’s degree in Engineering from a University
or an Institute abroad with at least 60% marks, 3.0/4 CPI or CGPA, or
8.0/10 CPI or CGPA.
3.1.2 Ph.D. Program in a Science discipline
(1) Master’s degree in Sciences with at least 60% marks or at least
6.5/10 CPI or CGPA with a valid GATE, CSIR, UGC score card or
equivalent. Such students are required to have at least 60% marks
or 6.5/10 CPI or CGPA in Bachelor’s degree. Applicants holding
Master’s degree in Engineering also are eligible to apply for Ph.D.
Programme in Sciences with at least 70% marks or 7/10 CPI or
CGPA. Again, such applicants are required to have at least 70%
marks or 7/10 CPI or CGPA in both the Bachelor’s and Master’s
degree.
(2) Applicants holding only Bachelor’s degree in Engineering with
(i) a B.Tech, B.E. or B.Sc.(Engineering) degree with at least 80%
marks or 8/10 CPI or CGPA and a valid GATE score card, and
6
(ii) a B.Tech. degree from any of the IITs with at least 8/10 CPI or
CGPA or a valid GATE score card; and
(3) Applicants with Master’s degree in Sciences or Engineering from a
University or an Institute abroad with at least 60% marks, 3.0/4
CPI or CGPA, or 8.0/10 CPI or CGPA.
3.1.3 Ph.D. Program in a Humanities and Social Science discipline
(1) Master’s degree in Humanities, Social Sciences, Sciences,
Engineering or allied areas with at least 55% marks or 6.0/10 CPI
or CGPA with a valid GATE, UGC or CSIR score.
(2) Applicants holding only Bachelor’s degree in Engineering with
(a) a B.Tech, B.E. or B.Sc.(Engineering) degree with at least 80%
marks or 8/10 CPI or CGPA and a valid GATE score card, and
(b) a B.Tech. degree from any of the IITs with at least 8/10 CPI or
CGPA or a valid GATE score card; and
(3) Applicants with Master’s degree in Humanities, Social Sciences,
Sciences, Engineering or allied areas from a University or an
Institute abroad with at least 60% marks, 3.0/4 CPI or CGPA, or
8.0/10 CPI or CGPA.
3.2 Selection Procedure
The Academic Committee shortlists applicants with a proven
academic record based on a cut-off of the GATE, CSIR or UGC score
card or equivalent. The shortlisted applicants will be called for the
written examination and/or interview. Admission will be made based
on technical performance at the written examination and/or interview.
The Institute shall call the shortlisted candidates for an
interview to a Selection Committee consisting of Faculty Members
associated with that particular Department. Based on the technical
performance of the candidate in the interview in addition to her/his
academic record, the Selection Committee will recommend to the
Chairman, Senate, names of candidates found suitable for admission to
the Ph.D. Program.
All applicants, who are offered admission, will be informed
within a week of the interview process. Candidates whose selection is
7
approved by the Chairman, Senate, will be admitted to the Ph.D.
Program at IIT Jodhpur after paying the prescribed fee for the
Program.
3.3 Supervisor Allocation
(1) The Supervisor for Students admitted to the Ph.D. Program shall be
identified during the interview. The Supervisor identification will
be based on the research interest of the student and the availability
of a faculty member willing to supervise such a work.
(2) At the time of selection, one Supervisor will be identified. If the
research work chosen requires more than one Supervisor, the
student or Supervisor can make a request with justification along
with the consent of the proposed Supervisor for consideration by
the Academic Committee. Appointment of Co-Supervisor should
be completed within one and half years of admission to the Ph.D.
Program. The Co-Supervisor can be from an Institute, University or
Laboratory of National repute outside IIT Jodhpur. Such
appointments shall be made by Chairman Senate, IIT Jodhpur.
3.4 Reservation Policy
The norms of reservation for different categories shall be
adopted as laid down by the Ministry of Human Resource Development,
Government of India.
3.5 Non-degree Program
A non-degree student is a student who is registered for a
degree in a recognized Institute or a University in India or abroad, and
who is officially sponsored by that Institute or University to complete a
part of her/his academic programme at IIT Jodhpur. For that purpose,
the non-degree student may carry out research, take courses for credit
or otherwise, and/or may use other academic facilities. An official
transcript of work done at the Institute along with grades obtained, if
any, would be given to the non-degree student concerned for her/his
use as she/he may deem appropriate. But, any credits earned at the
Institute, by a non-degree student, cannot be applied for any degree
program of IIT Jodhpur at any time thereafter. A person can be
admitted as a non-degree student on a duly sponsored application to
the Coordinator (Academics), who will recommend admission on the
8
advice of AC to the Chairman, Senate, for approval. A non-degree
student may be admitted for a maximum period of one year. The
strength of non-degree students in any programme should not be more
than 25% of the program strength. A non-degree student will be
required to pay all applicable fees depending upon the status,
programme, and nationality. Such students will be governed by all
rules, regulations and discipline applicable to regular students of the
Institute.
3.6 Cancellation of Admission
Students admitted provisionally or otherwise to any
programme shall submit copies of their mark sheets, provisional
certificates, etc. of the qualifying examination and other documents by
the last date specified for the purpose in the Academic Calendar. The
Senate reserves the right to cancel the admission of any student, if
(a) she/he fails to submit the prescribed documents demonstrating
her/his minimum academic qualification for admission, by the
specified date or to meet other stipulated requirement(s); and
(b) it is found (at any time later) that the student had provided some
false information or suppressed relevant information while seeking
admission.
3.7 Fulfilment of Admission Requirements
Admission to Ph.D. programs requires that the applicant be
eligible, go through the laid-down admission procedure, and pay the
prescribed fees. All admissions to the Ph.D. programs should be
formally approved by the Senate.
(a) Course Work
Ph.D. students are required to undergo 600 and 700 level
coursework at the Institute, offered either by the Department with
which the Supervisor of the Ph.D. student is associated or by any
other Department. The minimum number of 600 and 700 level
courses is listed in Table 2, which the Ph.D. student should meet to
complete the coursework requirement. Ph.D. students holding an
M.Tech. degree from IIT Jodhpur or any other IITs shall not credit
the same or equivalent courses.

b) Comprehensive Examination
After completing the coursework, the Ph.D. student is required
to appear for Comprehensive Examination, which tests the breadth of
knowledge and ability to do research. Comprehensive Examination
will consist of a written and an oral examination; written
examination will be based on open-ended questions in proposed
area of research to test the analytic thinking of the student (and not
on any specific course work), and oral examination will focus on
background to start research in a particular field, and response of
student in written examination. In special circumstances, a student
may also be allowed to appear for Comprehensive Examination before
completing the coursework, or after the proposed timeline on the
recommendation of the Supervisor and Academic Committee to the
Chairman, Senate.
The Comprehensive Examination shall be coordinated by the
Supervisor(s) and at least three other Faculty Members from the
Institute nominated by the Supervisor(s) and approved by the
Coordinator (Academics). These three other faculty members should
have had research experience in the proposed research area of the
student or an allied research area.
The student shall demonstrate satisfactory performance in the
Comprehensive Examination; else the student shall be given one
more chance to appear for the Comprehensive Examination after a
period of two months. If the student fails to perform satisfactorily
10
in this attempt also, the registration of the student in the Ph.D.
program stands cancelled. Normally, the student is expected to
successfully complete the Comprehensive Examination by the end
of following semesters (from the date of Ph.D. registration) as
indicated in Table 3, failing which the registration of the student in
the Ph.D. program stands cancelled.

(c) State-of-the-Art Seminar
After the successful completion of the Comprehensive
Examination, the student is required to give a public State-of-the-Art
Seminar based on a thorough survey of literature in the proposed
research area. This Seminar must be given in no case later than the
end of third semester from the date of registration to the Ph.D.
program. The State-of-the-Art Seminar given by the student shall
be evaluated by the Supervisor(s); if the performance is found to be
unsatisfactory, the student shall present the State-of-the-Art
Seminar again after 2 months.
(d) Open Seminar
After successfully presenting the State-of-the-Art Seminar and
undertaking research work, the student shall give a public Open
Seminar at least two months before the submission of the Thesis. In
this Open Seminar, the student shall present the main contention of
research findings. It is intended to give the student any inputs or
suggestions on the research carried out. Hence, there is no
evaluation of this presentation made by the student.
11
(e) Thesis Submission and Defense
The student shall submit the Thesis within two months of the
Open Seminar. Prior to submission of the Thesis, the student
should have preferably at least one paper either published or
accepted for publication in a peer reviewed journal. Further,
1. The Supervisor(s) shall propose a list of 10 examiners consisting
of at least four Faculty Members from abroad and 4 Faculty
Members from India, who have the expertise in the area in
which the student undertook research. For selecting an
examiner, following guidelines should be followed
(a) The examiners shall have at least 6 years Post-Ph.D.
experience;
(b) No two proposed examiners shall be from the same
organization; and
(c) The examiners can be Faculty Members or Scientists, of
standing and repute.
The list provided by the Ph.D. Thesis Supervisor is not
binding on the Chairman, Senate. In special instances, the
Chairman, Senate may identify examiners beyond in the list.
2. The Chairman, Senate, IIT Jodhpur, shall select two examiners
from the proposed list, of which at least one should be an
examiner from outside India. In addition, the Supervisor(s)
shall be the examiner(s) of the Thesis. The consent of these
Faculty Members shall be taken before sending the Thesis to
them.
3. The Indian examiners should attend in person the Thesis
Defense.
4. The examiners shall submit a written report on the Thesis
within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the
Thesis.
5. If both examiners declare the Thesis as acceptable for award of
Ph.D. degree, the Coordinator (Academics) shall request the
Supervisor(s) to hold the Thesis Defense by the student.
6. If any of the examiners rejects the Thesis for the award of the
Ph.D. degree, the Coordinator (Academics) shall report the matter
to the Chairman, Senate, IIT Jodhpur, for further consideration.
The Chairman, Senate, IIT Jodhpur, will refer the Thesis to a
third examiner under special circumstances, else the
12
registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the Ph.D.
program.
7. If both examiners reject the Thesis for the award of the Ph.D.
degree, no degree shall be awarded by the Institute, and the
registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the Ph.D.
program.
8. If an examiner suggests revision of the Thesis, the student shall
resubmit the Thesis after the revision within a prescribed time
period specified by the Chairman, Senate, under the guidance
of the Supervisor(s).
9. When both examiners recommend the Thesis as accepted for
the student to defend the Thesis, or after the resubmission of
the Thesis after incorporating the suggestions/corrections
given by the examiners, the student shall publicly present the
Thesis and defend the contention of the Thesis.
The committee consisting of Supervisor(s), the Examiner from
within India and the three Faculty Members, who participated in the
Comprehensive Examination of the student, shall evaluate the Thesis
Defense of the Ph.D. student also. On their recommendation,
Coordinator (Academics) shall recommend to Senate, to consider the
award of Ph.D. degree to the student.
4. COURSEWORK REQUIREMENTS
4.1 Academic Load
Each course is given a weightage called credits. The number of
credits of each course is based on the number of contact hours for
lectures, tutorials, and practicals. A typical PG course is of 3-4 credits.
Credits will be assigned to the courses based on the following general
pattern:
(a) One credit for each lecture class of 50 minutes;
(b) One credit for each tutorial class of 50 minutes; and
(c) One credit for each laboratory or practical class of three hours.
4.2 Registration
Students are required to register each semester for the courses
as per the programme, on the dates specified in the Academic
Calendar. After the successful completion of the required courses, a
13
Ph.D. student must continue to register in the following semester till
she/he submits her/his Thesis.
4.3 Registration Procedure
A list of courses to be offered in the next semester will be
announced online by the AC. Students shall pre-register for courses, in
consultation with their respective Supervisor. The registration
procedure involves
(a) Online filling of the registration form with courses proposed to be
credited in the semester;
(b) Payment of fees and clearance of outstanding dues (if any); and
(c) Signing of the registration roll at the office of the Head of the
Department hosting the Ph.D. Program.
A fresh student joining the Institute, who is awaiting the final results of
the qualifying examination, is allowed to register provisionally on
submission of a certificate from her/his last Institute stating that
she/he has appeared in the final examination of the qualifying degree.
The student is required to submit documents of having passed the
qualifying examination by the last date given in the Academic
Calendar for the registration to be regularized.
4.4 Late Registration
If for any compelling reason, like illness, a student is unable to
register on the day of registration, she/he can register before the late
registration date of registration specified in the academic calendar. If a
student seeks prior permission to register late on other valid grounds,
Chairman, AC, may allow late registration. Beyond the date of late
registration, no student will be allowed to register. In special cases, the
final decision will rest with the Senate.
4.5 Adding and Dropping of Courses
A student may add or drop course(s) within one week of the
beginning of the semester or the last date(s) specified in the Academic
Calendar. For this, the student must fill the appropriate form, get it
endorsed by the Instructor of the course being added, and submit the
same to the AC. No permission is required to drop a course.
14
4.6 Withdrawing from a Course
After the last date of add-drop, a student will have the option of
withdrawing from a course. The last date of course withdrawal will be
1 week after the first Mid-Term Exam. A student can withdraw from a
course with the permission of the course Instructor, and subsequent
approval from the Academic Committee. A student cannot add a new
course in lieu of the dropped course. The withdrawn course will be
mentioned in the Student’s grade card with a letter grade ‘Y’.
4.7 Cancellation of Registration
Absence for a period of four or more weeks without prior
permission during a semester shall result in automatic cancellation of
the registration of a student from all the courses in that semester.
5. TEACHING AND EVALUATION
5.1 Teaching
(a) Medium of Instruction
The medium of instruction of all courses shall be English.
(b) Approval of Courses
Each course along with its weight in terms of credits is
approved by the Senate. Only approved courses may be offered
during any semester/summer-term.
(c) List of Courses
The list of courses to be offered in a Ph.D. Program is finalized
before the beginning of the semester, by the Department hosting
that Program.
(d) Conduct of Courses
Each course shall be conducted by the Faculty Member with the
assistance of required Teaching Assistants, as required. The Faculty
Member is responsible for conducting the course: teaching in the
class, holding the examinations, evaluating the performance of
students, awarding the grades at the end of the semester, and
submitting the grades to AC within 72 hours of the completion of
the final examination.
(e) Teaching Assignments
Prior to each semester, the Head of the Department hosting the
Ph.D. Program shall request the Faculty Members of her/his
15
Department to provide a list of courses being floated by faculty
members in the next semester. The Head of the Department shall
hold a meeting of all its faculty members to identify names of
faculty members offering the courses of the next semester.
(f) Auditing of Courses
A student may audit any number of courses beyond the
prescribed minimum number of courses. Students wishing to audit
a course shall seek the consent of the Instructor of the course being
audited. The name of the audited course will appear in the Grade-
Card of the student. No grade will be awarded to students auditing
a course; the Instructor may require such students to submit all
homeworks and term papers during the semester just like the
students, who are crediting the course.
5.2 Attendance Requirements
A student should have full attendance in each course. Unless
the student takes leave of absence for valid reasons, the student has to
attend every lecture, tutorial, or lab session. If a student is absent
without any reason, the Instructor would send him a warning by
email. If the student’s attendance falls below 80% then the Instructor
will notify the Academic Section and a letter will be sent to the
student’s parents. If the student still does not attend the classes
regularly, then the Academic Committee can deregister the student
from the course. Once a student is deregistered from a course, that
course will not show up in the grade-card of the student.
5.3 Evaluation
The performance of students in a course is evaluated in a
continuous basis, using their interaction in the classroom, and
performances in examinations, the laboratory work (if any), and term-
papers and projects.
(a) Schedule of Examinations
Each course shall have two mid-semester and one end-semester
examinations; the mid-semester examinations shall be of 60 minutes
duration and the final examination of 180 minutes. The weightages of
elements of evaluation in different courses are listed in Table 4.

(b) Make-up Examinations
No make-up examinations are admissible for any reason. But, if
a student fails to appear in any examination (two mid-semester and
one end semester examinations) for a genuine reason (such as illness),
she/he may make a request to AC for a make-up examination within
two days of the date of the scheduled examination; a certificate shall be
furnished from the Medical Officer of the Institute Health Center,
when illness being the reason for absence from the examination. In
such cases, the marks obtained in the other elements of evaluation shall
be prorated for the examination missed. When two examinations are
missed in a course, the prorating is done for only one examination; the
marks in the other examination shall be taken as zero.
5.4 Grading System
(a) Grades and Grade Points
At the end of the semester, a student is awarded a relative letter
grade in each course by the Instructor offering the course
considering the performance of the student during the semester
with respect to those of the other students registered in the course.
Five regular letter grades, namely A, B, C, D and F shall be
awarded in each course for Ph.D. students. Each letter grade is
associated with a numerical equivalent on a 10-point scale (called
Grade Point) shown in Table 5. The grades shall be submitted to the
AC within 72 hours after the end semester examination.
A student is awarded ‘I’ grade in a course, when the student
fails to appear in the end-semester examination for a genuine
reason. The student shall appear for a make-up examination within
the first week of the next semester and seek to convert the ‘I’ grade
into one of the regular grades, at least one day before the last date
17
of add drop in the next semester. Any ‘I’ grade remaining after this
date shall be converted automatically into an ‘F’ grade.
A Ph.D. student shall obtain at least a B Grade in the minimum
number of courses that she/he needs to credit.
(b) Change of Grade Already Awarded
Normally, a letter grade once awarded shall not be changed.
Only, in exceptional circumstances, the Senate may allow the required
change.

5.5 Grade Point Averages
The Semester Grade Point Average (SGPA) is a weighted average
of the grades earned by a student in all the courses credited by
her/him and reflects her/his academic performance in the respective
semester. If the grade points associated with the letter grades earned
by a student in N courses registered during a semester are G1, G2, …
18
GN, and the corresponding credits C1, C2, … CN, then the SGPA is given
byN
NN
CCC
GCGCGC
SGPA 

 ...
...
21
2211
The Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) indicates the overall
academic performance of a student in all the courses registered up to
the latest completed semester. The CGPA is computed in a similar
manner as the SGPA, considering all the courses in all semesters.
5.6 Grade Card and Transcript
A Grade Card shall be issued to each student at the end of each
semester, and a Transcript at the end of the Ph.D. Program.
6. TERMINATION
6.1 Termination from Ph.D. Program
A student may be terminated from the Ph.D. Program by the
Chairman, Senate, if the student
(a) is absent without authorized leave of absence for a major part of the
semester and does not appear in the end-semester examination of
the courses in which she/he is registered;
(b) fails to report and register by the last date of registration without a
bonafide reason;
(c) violates the code of conduct, involves in ragging, etc., as confirmed
by the student Disciplinary Action Committee of the Institute; or
(d) does not earn the prescribed minimum number of credits within a
maximum of 2 years from the date of registration, including all
leaves of absence.
6.2 Appeal against Termination
A student, who is terminated from the Ph.D. Program, can
appeal for reconsideration to the Chairman, Senate. In the appeal, the
student is expected to give reasons for poor academic performance
and/or why the termination should be reconsidered. The Senate shall
take a final decision after considering all the available inputs. But, the
Senate will not entertain any further appeal for review, unless
substantial additional information is brought to its notice.
19
7. LEAVE
Application for leave of absence should be addressed to the
Chairman, AC, and submitted with a medical certificate, if applicable.
Usually, leave must not be availed of without prior approval of the AC.
Applications for all kinds of leave must be submitted well in advance
of the date of commencement of the leave requested. Student’s absence
from the Institute without sanctioned leave will entail loss of financial
assistantship for the period of absence and in extreme circumstances
may also result in the termination from the respective Ph.D. Program.
7.1 Short Leave
Ph.D. students are entitled for vacation leave up to a maximum
of 15 days per Semester in addition to Public Holidays. Vacation leave
not availed in a Semester will be carried over to the next Semester up
to a maximum of 15 days. For bonafide reasons, the student may also
be allowed casual leave for up to 7 days per semester.
Ph.D. students may be granted medical leave, duly supported
by a medical certificate, up to a maximum of 15 days per year. Such
leave shall not entail any loss of financial assistantship. Female
students are entitled for maternity leave, duly supported by a medical
certificate, for a maximum of 3 months, once during the tenure of their
assistantship or fellowship. Male students are also entitled for 15 days
paternity leave, once during the tenure of their assistantship or
fellowship. The leave should be duly supported by a medical
certificate.
Special Leave is admissible with the recommendation of
Supervisor(s) to attend Seminars and Conferences in India or abroad to
present research papers.
7.2 Temporary Withdrawal / Semester Leave
Normally, a student is not allowed to withdraw from the Ph.D.
program temporarily and is expected to complete the program without
a break. But, for genuine reasons and/or in exceptional circumstances,
a student may be allowed to withdraw temporarily on leave of absence
at the discretion of AC and/or Senate for an extended period. Such
leave of absence(s) shall ordinarily not exceed two semesters with or
20
without break during the entire period of the Ph.D. Program. Absence
for a period of four or more weeks in any semester will result in
automatic withdrawal from all courses in that semester.
In case of a prolonged leave of absence due to medical or other
genuine reasons, the student or his parents must notify the Office of
Academics, before proceeding on leave, or as soon as possible. A
student who remains on authorized leave of absence due to ill health,
is required to submit on return a certificate from a Registered Medical
Practitioner to the effect that he/she is sufficiently cured and is fit to
resume his/her studies. Within a fortnight of the student joining back
to the Institute after recovering from illness, he/she should get his
treatment verified by the Medical Officer at the Health Center of IIT
Jodhpur and get the treatment summary recorded on his/her medical
booklet. The student will be allowed to register only when AC is fully
satisfied of his/her state of health. The Academic Committee may advise
the student to apply for a reduced course load or, if deemed necessary,
dropping the semester.
7.3 Permission to Proceed to other Institutions
To help students to broaden their horizons and gain
course/work experience, she/he may be permitted to proceed to other
academic institutes in India or abroad as a non-degree student. The
following guidelines and procedures apply for this purpose:
(1) Eligibility: A student may be allowed to spend up to one semester
and/or one summer terms in any academic
institute/university/industry of repute in India or abroad with
prior permission of AC, if the student has:
(a) Completed course work, comprehensive examination, and
state-of-the-art-Seminar; and
(b) No ‘F’ grade in any course.
(2) Procedure: The student shall make an application to AC through the
Supervisor and Head of the Department hosting the program,
giving details of the proposed visit, and shall submit a statement of
purpose with sufficient information about the
institute/university/industry where she/he has chosen to spend
time as a non-degree student. The AC will examine the student’s
21
request. On the recommendation of the AC, the Senate may
approve the proposal and grant permission, with leave of absence,
to the student to proceed as a non-degree student to the selected
institute.
(3) Transfer of Credits and Waiver in-lieu thereof: The student will be
informed about the requirements she/he must fulfil to apply, on
her/his return, for academic credit. On return, the student may
apply for waiver with an official transcript of the grades obtained
by her/him at the selected institute as a non-degree student and
other documents/material that the concerned Department may
require for evaluation. The AC will determine the equivalent
courses and/or requirements for which the student may be given a
waiver in her/his Ph.D. Program at IIT Jodhpur. Against each
course or requirement for which a waiver is granted, the letter
grade ‘W’ shall appear on the grade card and transcript.
On the recommendation of the AC, the Senate may allow a
student waiver for a maximum credit equivalent to that earned in 2
semesters in the respective branch in-lieu of her/his successful
completion of the Ph.D. Program, elsewhere as a non-degree
student.
(4) Students selected by the Institute, using prescribed rules and
procedures, to proceed on any Academic Exchange Program will
be governed by the other Clauses of 8.
8. REQUIREMENTS FOR GRADUATION
A student is deemed to have completed the requirements for
graduation if she/he has met the requirements laid down in Clauses
8.1 to 8.4.
8.1 Minimum Duration of Residence
Ph.D. students are required to complete at least the duration of
stay listed in Table 6. Part-time students sponsored by R&D Institutes
or Laboratories are required to stay on the campus until completion of
coursework, comprehensive examination and state-of-the-art Seminar.

8.2 Academic
A Ph.D. student is said to have completed the course work
requirements, if she/he satisfies the criteria laid down in Sections 4
and 5.4. The student shall be declared to have fulfilled the Academic
requirements if she/he has completed the minimum number of courses
as per Table 2.
8.3 Payment of Fees and Dues
The student shall pay all admissible fee and dues, and seek a No
DUE CERTIFICATE from the Institute, on completion of the Academic
Requirements.
8.4 No Case of Disciplinary Action
The student shall not have any case of indiscipline pending
against her/him.
8.5 Award of Degrees
A student who completes all the graduation requirements
specified in Clauses 8.1 to 8.4 is recommended by the Senate to the
Board of Governors (BOG) for the award of the appropriate degree in
the ensuing convocation. The degree can be awarded only after the
BOG accords its approval.
23
8.6 Withdrawal of Degree
Under extremely exceptional circumstances, where gross
violation of the graduation requirements is detected at a later stage, the
Senate may recommend to the Board of Governors withdrawal of a
degree already awarded to the student.
9. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
Full time Ph.D. students shall be offered Teaching or Research
Assistantships in return for 8 hours of work per week. Teaching
Assistantship duties shall include assisting Faculty Members in the
conduct of courses (e.g., grading homeworks and tutorials, but not
examinations, quizzes and term papers), and participating in tutorial or
laboratory classes in the presence of Faculty Members (but not without
them). Research Assistantship duties will include assisting faculty
members in the conduct of research (e.g., related to sponsored research
projects, but not related to consultancy projects).
10. AMENDMENTS
Notwithstanding anything contained in this document, the
Senate of IIT Jodhpur reserves the right to modify/amend without
notice, the curricula, procedures, requirements, and rules pertaining to
its Ph.D. Programs.

Faculty Members
Gaurav Bhatnagar
 About

Gaurav Bhatnagar is a Professor in the Department of Mathematics at Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur since June 2023. He was an Associate Professor and Assistant Professor in the same Department from September 2013 onward. Prior to joining IIT Jodhpur, Dr. Bhatnagar spent four years as a Post-doctoral Research Associate in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at University of Windsor, Canada from September 2009 to August 2013. Dr. Bhatnagar received his PhD in interdisciplinary area of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science and an MSc in Applied Mathematics from the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, India, in 2010 and 2005, respectively. He is also the Project Director of TIH iHub Drishti, a Section 8 Not-for-profit Organisation, promoted by and at IIT Jodhpur established under National Mission on Interdisciplinary Cyber Physical Systems (NM-ICPS) of the Government of India. His research interests lie in the broad area of wavelet and fractional transform theory, with applications in multimedia security, digital watermarking and encryption techniques, hashing protocols, biometrics, image analysis, segmentation and completion. Dr. Bhatnagar is the author of over 80 scholarly publications in peer reviewed technical journals and conference proceedings. He was recently listed under researchers in Artificial Intelligence & Image Processing in the newly released Stanford University listing of the top 2% of researchers globally. He is a member of several professional bodies, including IEEE, ACM, SIAM and AMS. He is associated with several journals as the technical committee member and has been regularly associated with international conferences/workshops in various roles such as Program Chair, Area Chair, Session Chair and TPC Member.

Kirankumar R Hiremath
 About

Dr. Kirankumar Hiremath is an Professor of Mathematics at IIT Jodhpur. He is an applied mathematician working in wave-matter interactions, mathematical physics, scientific computations, and applied analysis. His specialization is mathematical optics-photonics and the design of efficient methods to solve real life problems. He did his post-graduation from IIT Bombay and PhD from the University of Twente (The Netherlands). After that, he did his post-doc at  Optoelectronics Center, University of North Carolina at Charlotte (USA), and  Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (Germany). He worked at Zuse Institute Berlin (Germany). Since 2012, he has been with IIT Jodhpur. He is also a member of the Interdisciplinary Research Group on Quantum Information. His mathematical work on bent waveguides, microresonators, and coupled mode theory is very well received.

Puneet Sharma
 About

Puneet Sharma is working as an Professor in the Department of Mathematics at Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. He served as a faculty member at Department of Mathematics, IISER Bhopal for about six months after which he joined IIT Jodhpur as an Assistant Professor at IIT Jodhpur in 2012. He also served as a postdoctoral Fellow at School of Physical Sciences, JNU, New Delhi for more than a year. He received his Masters and Ph.D. degrees in Mathematics from Indian Institute of Technology Delhi in 2005 and 2011 respectively. His research interests include Topological Dynamics, Symbolic Dynamics, Chaos Theory and their applications.


Among his notable achievements, he was awarded first prize for best academic performance in B.Sc(H) Mathematics. He also secured All India Rank 21 in GATE (MA) 2004 Examination.

Abhishek Sarkar
 About

Dr. Abhishek Sarkar is an Associate Professor of Mathematics at IIT Jodhpur. He earned his Ph.D. from TIFR-CAM, Bangalore. He did his postdoc at University of West Bohemia, Pilsen, Czech Republic for more than three year. He served as an Assistant Professor at BITS Pilani KK Birla Goa Campus prior to join IIT Jodhpur as an Assistant Professor in 2019. 

His research primarily focuses on nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs), including elliptic (of second and higher orders) and nonlocal equations.​

Among notable achievements, he was awarded the DST-INSPIRE Faculty Award (DST, Govt. of India) in the year 2018.

Dilpreet Kaur
 About

Dilpreet Kaur is an Associate Professor in the Department of Mathematics at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur. Her academic journey includes a PhD in Mathematics from IISER Mohali, followed by postdoctoral fellowships at IISER Pune under the NBHM and SERB National Post Doctoral Fellowships. She was awarded a Gold Medal for securing the first position in her MSc Mathematics program at Panjab University in 2009. She has been serving as a faculty member at IIT Jodhpur since 2019.

She has taught a wide range of mathematics courses, including Real Analysis, Number Theory, Abstract Algebra, Linear Algebra, Optimization, and specialized subjects like Group Theory for Machine Learning and Representations of Finite Groups. She is also teaching regularly in national level schools sponsored by National center of Mathematics (NCM) and Indian Women and Mathematics (IWM). She has also organized workshops and academic programs, such as the Annual Foundation School-I (2022), Women in Maths: Progress and Challenges (2022), and the Online SageMath Workshop (2021). 

In research, Dr. Kaur has made significant contributions to algebra, particularly in the areas of finite groups, conjugacy classes and representations of finite groups, quadratic forms,  quandles and quandle rings. She is the Principal Investigator (PI) of a project titled "Computations in Wreath Product", funded by the Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) under the MATRICS scheme.

Nil Kamal Hazra
 About

Dr. Nil Kamal Hazra is currently working as an Associate Professor at IIT Jodhpur. He obtained  his Ph.D. degree in Reliability Theory from IISER Kolkata. After completion of his PhD, he joined as a Visiting Scientist at ISI Kolkata. Then, he moved to South Africa to pursue his postdoctoral research career, and he joined as a Claude Leon Postdoctoral Fellow in the Dept. of Mathematical Statistics at University of Free State, Bloemfontein. Then he started his professional career as an Assistant Professor in the Dept. of Mathematics at IIITDM Kancheepuram, Chennai. After spending one year at IIITDM Kancheepuram,  he moved to IIT Jodhpur where he is currently working in the Dept. of Mathematics.

His current research interest includes Reliability Theory, Applied Probability, Robust Statistical Inference, Sequential Data Analysis and Time Series Analysis.

He has been appointed as an Associate Editor in leading statistical journals, namely, Opsearch, Communications in Statistics-Theory and Methods, Communications in Statistics-Simulations and Computations, and Communications in Statistics- Case Studies and Data Analysis.

V V M S Chandramouli
 About

Dr. V. V. M. S Chandramouli is an Associate Professor in the Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. In December 2008, he has completed his Ph.D in Dynamical Systems  from the Department of Mathematics, University of Groningen, The Netherlands and State University of New York, Stony Brook, USA. He arrived at IIT Jodhpur in November 2009. 

His research focuses on Dynamical Systems, including Renormalization theory in low-dimensional dynamics, Dynamical Neuroscience,  Fractal Geometry, and q-deformed nonlinear systems.

His work has been published  in the leading journals such as Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems, Discrete and Continuous Dynamical Systems, Journal of Statistical Physics, Chaos Solitons and Fractals, Journal of Difference Equations and Applications, Applied Mathematics and computation, Nonlinear Dynamics. etc.

Anuj Kumar
 About

I am an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mathematics at IIT Jodhpur. I received my Ph.D. in Mathematics from Indiana University Bloomington, USA, in 2022. Following my doctoral studies, I spent two years as a Postdoctoral Researcher at Florida State University, USA. In my research, I study partial differential equations arising from hydrodynamic models, such as incompressible Euler and Navier-Stokes equations, and geophysical models such as the surface quasi-geostrophic equation (SQG) and its generalizations.

Ongoing Projects 
Theoretical Development of Differential Attacks on Block Ciphers and Its Counter-Measures
Design and Development of A Software Platform to Create Immersive Content from Digitized and Born Digital Documents
Development of Concealed Object Detection and Recognition System
Hybrid Methods for  Multi-objective Optimization Problems Combining Genetic Algorithms with Gradient Based Techniques
Hardware Aware Frame-Theoretic Sparse Neural Network for Resource-constrained Platform
Study of quantum attacks on block and stream ciphers and its counter-measures
Computations in Wreath Product
Dynamics of Non-Autonomous Schmidt Games
Applications of Lie group analysis and topological methods to solve complex flow problems
Local and non local phase transition problems with nonlinear boundary conditions
Renormalization of multimodal maps with low smoothness
Some important problems on information measures
Mathematical modelling of infectious diseases using surfactant dynamics
Density function for some invariants in prime characteristic and Hilbert-Kunz density function for Schubert Varietie

Completed Projects 
Nonlocal variational problems with Dirichlet-Neumann mixed boundary conditions
Mathematical framework of secondary and nonlinear instabilities for complex flow systems
Towards more realistic \delta-shock models and their applications
Spectral Methods for derivative dependent integral equations and integro-differential equations.
Eigenvalue type problems related to linear and quasi-linear operators.
On Graph Induced Symbolic Dynamics 
Essential dimension and the least degree of faithful representation of a group 	
Superconvergence results for integro-differential initial and boundary value problems by spectral projection methods 
Automorphism Groups of Induced Symbolic Systems 
Multimedia security based on biometrics for copyright protection and authentication 
Theory and Numerical Algorithms for Interval System and Interval Eigen 


Collaborations

Faculty Members of the Department of Mathematics are keen to collaborate with individuals from academia, R&D laboratories and industry in India and abroad, in areas of mutual interest.

These collaboration include

    Teaching of courses,
    Organising short courses,
    Authoring of books,
    Undertaking research, 
    Developing technologies.


Some of the current engagements are with colleagues from the following Institutes/Universities:

    IITs, ISI, IISc, IISERs, IMSc, TIFR India
    University of British Columbia, Kelowna, BC, Canada
    University of Windsor, Canada
    Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA
    US Air Force Research Laboratory, Rome, NY, USA
    Arizona State University (USA)
    University of North Carolina at Charlotte (USA)
    Zuse Institute Berlin (Germany)


Welcome to the Department of Mechanical Engineering
The Department of Mechanical Engineering at IIT Jodhpur is devoted to quality engineering education and pursuits the excellence in research. It is dedicated to preparing students to face the emerging challenges faced by society. The vision of the Department is to translate its research and to innovate in pedagogy to enable ignited young minds to find technological solutions for upcoming challenges. The Department offers B. Tech. M. Tech. and Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering within three major domains of Thermofluids, Design, and Smart Manufacturing. The students also have the opportunity to work with an interdisciplinary specialization in emerging areas such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), Internet of things (IoT), Smart Healthcare, and Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS).

At IIT Jodhpur, mechanical engineers are educated in a way not only to adapt but to define direct change. This is reflected in the portfolio of the current activities of the Department. Faculty members are involved in a wide range of projects in the areas of energy conversion and power systems, heat transfer and fluid mechanics, mechanics of solid, mechanical vibrations, robotics, autonomous unmanned vehicles, design optimization, acoustics and noise control, control systems, rotor dynamics, nanomaterials, biomechanics, bio-inspired thermo-fluids, fluid-structure interaction, etc. to name a few. Additionally, efforts are being made to introduce advanced concepts like smart manufacturing, Industry 4.O, Smart scientific computing techniques, high-performance computing, applications of artificial intelligence, machine learning algorithms, sensors, and IoT as a part of solving interdisciplinary problems requiring mechanical engineering know-how. Keeping a balance between theory and hands-on experience, the Department intends to provide its students with a solid foundation in core as well as emerging areas of mechanical engineering by inspiring critical thinking and nurturing problem-solving skills.

The department has active collaborations with AIIMS Jodhpur, General Electric, Thermax, DRDO, ISRO, TCS Innovation Lab, TVS Motor Company to name a few. The department has been attracting various sponsored projects from R&D organizations since its inception.


News & Newsletter

Sr. No. 	Description
1 	List of shortlisted candidates for the written test/interview for PhD, AY 2025-26 Semester II
2 	List of Candidates Shortlisted for Written Examination for Ph.D Admissions Under Different Categories AY 2025-26 Semester I (July 2025)- Round 2
3 	The Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur, invites applications for the PhD program for the semester commencing in July 2025 (Application deadline 26 June 2025)
4 	List of Candidates Shortlisted for Written Test and Interview for M.Tech. in Drone and Anti-Drone Technologies Admissions Under Different Categories
5 	List of Candidates Shortlisted for Written test and interview for M.Tech admission in AMD AY 2025-26
6 	List of Candidates Shortlisted for Written Examination for Ph.D Admissions AY 2025-26
7 	Virtual open house for prospective PhD students
8 	Applications are invited for Ph.D program in Mechanical Engineering Department ( June, 2025)
9 	23 ISME International Conference on Recent Advances in Mechanical Engineering
10 	List of Candidates Shortlisted for Written Examination for Ph.D Admissions Under Different Categories AY 2024-25 Semester II (Jan 2025)
11 	C. V. Raman Gold Medal Award
12 	Dr Chandan Pandey has been selected for the INAE Young Associate 2024
13 	Dr. Shrutidhara Sarma Selected for INAE Young Associateship 2024
14 	AY 2024-25 SEMESTER I M.Tech. ADMISSIONS UNDER ADMISSION CATEGORY Full-Time Regular Without Assistantship/Self-Sponsored
15 	Prof. Rahul Chhibber has been awarded W. H. Hobart Memorial Award from American Welding Society
16 	Reporting Details for Written Test/Interview for Admission in M.Tech.-Ph.D Dual Degree AY 2024-2025
17 	Syllabus for Written Test for Admission in M.Tech.-Ph.D Dual Degree AY 2024-2025
18 	List of Candidates Shortlisted for Written Examination for MTech in Advanced Manufacturing and Design Under Different Categories AY 2024-25 Semester 1 (July 2024)
19 	List of Candidates Shortlisted for Written Examination for MTech in Thermofluids Engineering Under Different Categories AY 2024-25 Semester 1 (July 2024)
20 	Reporting details of written test and interview for MTech in AMD and TFE under different categories AY 2024-25 Semester 1 (July 2024)
21 	Syllabus for Written Test for Ph.D Admissions AY 2024-25 Semester 1 (July 2024)
22 	List of Candidates Shortlisted for Written Examination for M.Tech - Ph.D. Admissions for AY 2024-25 Semester 1 (July 2024)
23 	List of Candidates Shortlisted for Written Examination for Ph.D Admissions AY 2024-25 Semester 1 (July 2024)
24 	Reporting Details for Offline Written Test and Interview
25 	Selected as Associate Editor of Programmable Materials Journal
26 	Applications are invited for Ph.D program in Mechanical Engineering Department (July, 2024)
27 	India Institute Fellowship Scheme for the academic year 2023-2024
28 	Prof. Kaushal Desai selected as an Associated Editor for the ASME- Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering (ASME-JCISE) 


Undergraduate Program
Department Vision

Reckoned as one of the most versatile engineering disciplines, Mechanical Engineering virtually touches every aspect of modern life, from mobile phones and biomedical devices to aircrafts and power plants. It is concerned with technological advancements through the development of products, processes, and power, at scales ranging from nano-scale to large and complex systems. Mechanical Engineering principles and skills are involved at some stage during the conception, design, development, and manufacture of every human-made object. While design and manufacturing involve the design of mechanisms and the analysis of materials, thermo-fluid systems include methods of energy conversions, heat transfer, and fluid flow. Future innovations crucial to the country’s growth will always have their roots in the world of mass, motion, forces, and energy- the world of mechanical engineers. At IIT Jodhpur, mechanical engineers are therefore trained, educated, and positioned, in a way not only to adapt but to define direct change. This is reflected in the portfolio of current activities of the department.

Our faculty are involved in a wide range of projects in the areas of Energy conversion and power systems, heat transfer and fluid mechanics, mechanics of solid, mechanical vibrations, robotics, autonomous unmanned vehicles, design optimization, acoustics and noise control, control systems, rotor dynamics, micro-nano materials and applications, biomechanics, bio-inspired thermofluids, fluid structure interaction, etc. to name a few. Additionally, efforts are being made to introduce advanced concepts like smart manufacturing, Industry 4.O, applications of artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning algorithms, sensors, and IoT as a part of solving mechanical engineering problems. Keeping a balance between theory and hands-on experience, the department intends to provide its students with a solid foundation in core as well as emerging areas of mechanical engineering by inspiring critical thinking and nurturing problem-solving skills.

The department currently offers B.Tech in Mechanical Engineering. A wide range of specialization related courses is currently offered. Students also undergo B.Tech projects from the second year onwards to develop analytical skills and gain hands-on experience. Keeping a balance between theory and hands-on experience, the department intends to provide its students with a solid foundation in core as well as emerging areas of mechanical engineering by inspiring critical thinking and nurturing problem-solving skills.

The curriculum offers flexibility to students for pursuing capability-linked specializations of their choice, namely, Micro-Nano Engineering, Energy Engineering, Design Engineering, Smart Manufacturing.

Programs

The salient features of different UG programs run by the Department of Mechanical Engineering are as follows:

Regular B.Tech. 

    Duration: 4 years
    Emphasis on core mechanical subjects.
    Last semester dedicated to industrial training and projects.
    Possibility of engineering science students to choose mechanical stream as their specialization.

B.Tech. with specialization

    Duration: 4 years
    Department Specialization: Micro nano-engineering, Energy engineering, Design engineering, Smart manufacturing.
    Interdisciplinary: Entrepreneurship or management, Smart healthcare, Artificial intelligence, Robotics, and mobility systems.

B.Tech. - M.Tech. Program 

    Duration: 5 years
    Double degree aligned to specialization or minor area.
    Possibility of obtaining B.Tech and M.Tech double degree within 5 years of induction to the program


Key Objectives 

    Enabling students to have a fundamental understanding of the core concepts of Mechanical Engineering
    Developing analytical and computational ability with experimental skills to create individuals competent in professional engineering practices
    Stimulating critical thinking towards the application of mechanical engineering concepts in interdisciplinary problem solving
    Fostering students to advanced concepts like AI & ML, Industry 4.0, and IoT for product and system design
    Inculcating an attitude towards the commitment to engineering ethics, leadership qualities, and professional development.

New Skillsets Targeted

    Multi- and interdisciplinary approach
    Computer-aided design/modeling software/additive and smart manufacturing
    Latest industrial pursuits in the areas of automation, robotics, and smart scientific computing, microfluidics, hybrid and electric automotive vehicles
    Design and experimental validation of computational designs in the fields of alternative energies
    Advanced materials selection techniques
    Advanced mechanical testing and characterization techniques
    Familiarity with advanced and futuristic scientific computing techniques

Graduate Attributes

Graduates of the B.Tech program in Mechanical Engineering will have:

    Strong understanding of fundamentals of Thermofluids, Mechanical Design, and Manufacturing (Processes and Systems)
    Ability to apply mechanical engineering principles to address challenges in real-life problems through creative interdisciplinary thinking
    Ability to use different simulation and computational tools for a better understanding and designing of mechanical processes/systems
    Capability to appreciate the use of some of the advanced concepts like AI & ML, Robotics, Industry 4.0, IoT in Mechanical Engineering applications
    Awareness of grassroots problems of the society and the ability to provide technological solutions of sustainable nature. 6. Entrepreneurial spirit to undertake disruptive innovations
    Skills to communicate engineering concepts and ideas to peers in written or oral forms
    Commitment to professional ethics and have humanitarian engineering skills.

Learning Outcomes

The graduates of the B.Tech. program in Mechanical Engineering will:

    Gain a strong understanding of mathematics, science, and engineering fundamentals of mechanical engineering
    Be able to design and conduct experiments as well as to analyze and interpret data
    Be introduced to concepts including engineering design / optimization / sensors fabrication / computational methods / simulation tools / thermal systems / refrigeration / heat transfer/ fluid flows/ nanomaterials/ AI/ IoT/ Smart Computing for various applications
    Have the ability to design a mechanical system, component, or process tailored to meet desired needs under socio-economic and environmental constraints
    Be exposed to common problems that are prevalent in the domains of energy storage, systems and devices, clean energy, and nano-materials, futuristic technology, and advanced scientific computation methods, allowing them to innovate and develop technological solutions for the same
    Receive effective, hands-on laboratory training as a part of laboratory courses and short-term research projects
    Develop their communication skills by participating in classroom presentations, seminars, and workshops on manuscript/patent writing/presentation skills


Postgraduate Program
M.Tech

The department currently offers M.Tech in Mechanical Engineering with a specialization in Advanced Manufacturing & Design and Thermofluids Engineering. A wide range of specialization related courses is currently offered.

There are four modes of admission in M.Tech Program:

    Regular with fellowship 
    Industry-Sponsored
    Self-Sponsored
    Part-Time

The salient features of specializations.  (Download file : 380 KB)

The details of eligibility can be accessed here.

M.Tech students getting admission in regular mode are provided with an assistantship of Rs. 12400 per month as per the MHRD rules.


Guidelines and Format for Submission of Project Report for M.Tech. Students  (Download file 211 KB)

Link for online Application for M.Tech. Program (Self-Sponsored) in Mechanical Engineering

Detailed Advertisement for M.Tech program (Self-sponsored) in Mechanical Engineering

Brochure for M.Tech program (Self-sponsored) in Mechanical Engineering  (Download file 355 KB)


List of shortlisted candidates for M.Tech Admission test (Self-Sponsored) in Thermofluids (TFE)

List of shortlisted candidates for M.Tech Admission test (Self-Sponsored) in Advanced Manufacturing and Design (AMD)

Syllabus for written test for M.Tech Admission test (Self-Sponsored) in Thermofluids (TFE)

Syllabus for written test for M.Tech Admission test (Self-Sponsored) in Advanced Manufacturing and Design (AMD)

Reporting details for M.Tech Admission test (Self-Sponsored) in Thermofluids (TFE)

Reporting details for M.Tech Admission test (Self-Sponsored) in Advanced Manufacturing and Design (AMD)

List of selected candidates for M.Tech in Thermofluids Engineering (TFE)

List of selected candidates for M.Tech in Advanced Manufacturing and Design (AMD)
M.Tech-PhD Dual Degree

The department currently offers an M.Tech-PhD dual degree in Mechanical Engineering with a specialization in Advanced Manufacturing and Thermofluids. A wide range of specialization related courses is currently offered.

Specialization: Mechanical Design/ Thermofluids/ Advanced Manufacturing

The department offers M. Tech-PhD dual course in Mechanical Engineering within three major domains of Thermofluids, Mechanical Design, and Smart Manufacturing. The students also have the opportunity to work with an interdisciplinary specialization in emerging areas such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), Data and Computational Science, Smart Healthcare, Energy Materials, and Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS).

Click here for the salient features of specializations.( Download file)


*The expected duration for the award of Ph.D. degree in this program is 5 years. Admitted students are paid the monthly assistantship the same as that of Ph.D. scholars from the first day. The current assistantship is Rs 31000 per month as per the MHRD rules.


Doctorial Program

The vision of the Department is to enhance the research environment and to innovate in pedagogy to address the challenges of socio-economic and human resource development. The Department is committed to high-quality research by Faculty Members and Students in the pursuit of excellence in academics. The department offers a Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering within three major domains of Thermofluids, Design, and Manufacturing. The students also have the opportunity to work with an interdisciplinary specialization in emerging areas such as Artificial Intelligence (AI), Data and Computational Science, Smart Healthcare, Energy Materials, and Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS).

The fellowship for Ph.D. scholars is:
Mode	Fellowship
Ph.D. (Full Time)	As per MHRD Rules
Ph.D. (Part-Time/ Sponsored)	No Fellowship


The students enrolled in the Ph.D. program will receive a fellowship from the starting date of course.

A student shall be formally registered/admitted to the candidacy of Ph. D. degree only after he/she has cleared the comprehensive examination as per the Institute norms.

Link for webpage of Faculty Members
Applications are invited for Ph.D program in Mechanical Engineering Department ( January, 2025)

The Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur invites applications for the PhD program for the semester commencing in January 2025. The Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur hosts PhD programs under three major domains namely; Thermofluids, Design, and Advanced Manufacturing with Exposure in emerging areas such as Smart manufacturing, Additive manufacturing, Ultra-precision finishing, Welding, Artificial Intelligence and machine learning, Smart Healthcare, Nano-sensors, Multi-phase flows, Fluid-structure interactions, High speed flows, Hydrogen energy, Gas turbines, Vibration and acoustics, Robotics and automation, Computational solid and fracture mechanics.

Anand Krishnan Plappally
 About

I am a faculty in Engineering at IIT, Jodhpur (Indian Institute of Technology). I did a stint from March 2012-March 2014 as Assistant Professor at Center of Excellence in Energy, IITJ. I headed the focus group of Mechanical Engineering in 2014-15 to perform transition from COE Energy to Department of Mechanical Engineering. From 2015 to March 2019 as an Assistant Professor (7 years in total) in Mechanical Engineering. From March 2019 to June 2023 (4.2 years), Anand was an Associate Professor at the department and headed the Center for Emerging Technologies for Sustainable Development (CETSD) till August 31, 2023. I am also affiliated to the Space Science and Technology Program at IITJ since 2019.


Presently, I am a Professor in Mechanical Engineering. 


My teams work did focus in areas of  water-energy nexus, water filtration, wetland hydrodynamics, rural technologies, engineering education, micro-turbo designs, irrigation and horticulture, materials and probabilistic modeling in engineering design.


I was a Post Doctoral Associate at Rohsenow Kendall Heat Transfer Laboratory , in Mechanical Engineering Department at MIT, Cambridge, MA. My Advisor was Prof. John Lienhard V. I worked in the area of water-energy nexus and contributed mainly to energy for water and economics of water use.  


Enjoy and Read: Cost of Water


Curious Read: Energy for Water


Before I had another Post Doctoral Fellowship from Food, Agricultural and Biological Engineering (FABE) Department at The Ohio State University at Columbus, OH. I was involved in research on agricultural constructed wetland systems and also in physics of clay ceramics. My advisors were Prof. Larry C Brown and Prof. Alfred B. O. Soboyejo. 


I received the PhD (Engineering) under the guidance of Prof Alfred Soboyejo and Prof. Larry C Brown from Food, Agricultural and Biological Engineering Department and  I conducted some of my experiments at The Princeton Institute for the Science and Technology of Materials (PRISM) at Princeton University. This also helped me to work under Prof Winston Soboyejo.


 Previously I received the M.S. in Engineering Science and Mechanics under the guidance of Prof. Muhammad Ali R Sharif from the Aerospace Engineering and Mechanics Department at University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa. I was also co-advised by Prof. Richard C Bradt, Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, University of Alabama. Here I worked on numerical modeling of molten steel flows in an industrial tundish. Prior to this I have experience as a design engineer for irrigation projects with CIMMYT (a part of the CGIAR) India. Here I had the honor to work under Dr Raj Kishan Gupta.  Prior to that, I was at IIT Delhi and part of UN FAO projects in the mentorship of Prof P M V Subbarao.



 My Bachelors in Mechanical Engineering is from Madurai Kamaraj University in 2001. I am an alumnus of the Kerala School at Vikas Puri in New Delhi run under the aegis of Kerala Education Society and Government of Delhi. 

B Ravindra
 About

B. Ravindra joined IIT Jodhpur in 2010. He obtained his BTech from NIT Warangal in 1987 and M.Tech from IIT Kanpur in 1989 both in the area of Mechanical engineering. He obtained his PhD in 1994 from IIT Kanpur in the area of Nonlinear Vibrations. His main areas of research are Nonlinear Vibrations, Mechatronics, Vehicle dynamics and Renewable energy. Prior to joining IIT Jodhpur, he did his postdoctoral work in HongKong in the year 1995-1996. Subsequently he spent two years as an Alexander von Humboldt fellow at Technical university of Darmstadt, Germany. During 1998-2000 he worked in gas turbine industry with Alstom power. He worked on shape memory alloy actuators for automotive applications at the General Motors R&D center in Bangalore. At the IIT Jodhpur, he was involved in establishing a rooftop solr PV plant and Mechanical engineering laboratories. He was also a member of Building works committee and was actively involved in the campus construction and sustainable buildings research. He conducted a GIAN program on Vehicle dynamics. He is also involved in "Bridging the Innovation gap in schools" project to promote establishment of tinkering labs in rural schools.

Prodyut Ranjan Chakraborty 
 About

Dr. Prodyut Ranjan Chakraborty is a Professor in the Mechanical Engineering, IIT Jodhpur. He received his Bachelor degree of Mechanical Engineering from the North Bengal University in 2000, and his M.Sc Engineering in 2004, and PhD in 2011 both from the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Science Bangalore. Prior to his joining at IIT Jodhpur, he served two years at the Department of Material Physics in Space in German Aerospace Center (DLR) Cologne as a postdoctoral research fellow. He also worked as a Research Analyst at the Applied CFD Lab, G.E. Global Research Center Bangalore during the years 2004 and 2005. His primary area of research is numerical modeling of alloy solidification, latent heat based energy storage systems for high temperature applications, Thermal management and thermal comfort, and sorption cooling.

Rahul Chhibber
 About

Dr. Rahul Chhibber is a Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at IIT Jodhpur, where he has been a faculty member since 2012. He earned his Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering from IIT Roorkee in 2008.


His research interests encompass welding and joining, manufacturing and materials processing, and the mechanical behavior of materials. He has contributed significantly to the development of welding consumables for shielded metal arc and submerged arc welding processes. His work also includes the fabrication and structural integrity assessment of dissimilar material joints.


Dr. Chhibber has been involved in hygrothermal investigations on fiber-reinforced polymer nanocomposites. He has published over 90 research articles and has an h-index of 27. His work is widely cited, with over 2,400 citations.


His student recently received the C.V. Raman Gold Medal for the best thesis in 2024. He was also awarded the W.H. Hobart Memorial Award from the American Welding Society in 2024.


His research group has been recognized for excellence in presentations and research experimentation, including awards at international conferences and access to research facilities in Switzerland.

Ankur Gupta
 About

Ankur Gupta is an Associate Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur. His research focuses on developing innovative and inexpensive fabrication methods for MEMS and microsystems across diverse application domains. He has gained foundational expertise in multi-scale fabrication/characterization techniques, and surface engineering. 

Arun Kumar R
 About

Arun Kumar R is an Associate Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur. His area of expertise lies in high-speed flows and shock waves. He has established the Shock Waves and High-Speed Flow Laboratory (SWAHS Lab) at IIT Jodhpur, which focuses on experimental and computational research related to supersonic and hypersonic flow phenomena, including fuel injection, mixing enhancement, and blast wave interactions.

The Shock Waves and High-Speed Flow Laboratory (SWAHS Lab) is dedicated to advancing the frontiers of research and technology development in the aerospace and defense sectors. In addition to traditional high-speed aerodynamic applications, the lab actively explores multidisciplinary extensions of shock wave and high-speed flow research into fields such as refrigeration systems, biomedical engineering, industrial processing, and water purification. Ongoing research includes projects on supersonic intakes, supersonic air-fuel mixing in scramjet combustors, flow control and actuators, gas turbine cooling, electric propulsion systems, shock and blast wave attenuation, as well as novel applications like solar ejector refrigeration, steam ejector-based water purification, and shock wave-assisted biomedical techniques.

Barun Pratiher
 About

Dr. Barun Pratiher is an Associate Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur. He earned his Ph.D. from the Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati in 2019, following a Master of Engineering in Engineering Mechanics from the Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology (IIEST), Shibpur (formerly Bengal Engineering College) in 2004.

He began his academic career as a Lecturer at BITS Pilani and later joined IIT-ISM Dhanbad (formerly ISM Dhanbad) as an Assistant Professor in May 2009. In July 2011, he moved to IIT Jodhpur as an Assistant Professor.

His research interests span vibration and control, rotor dynamics, flexible robotic systems, MEMS, and nonlinear dynamics. Dr. Pratiher has published several research articles (60+) in leading international journals and conferences, contributing significantly to these areas. He has successfully led and completed multiple research projects and continues to be actively engaged in ongoing research endeavors.

Chandan Pandey
 About

Dr. Chandan Pandey completed his M.Tech. in Mechanical and Industrial Engineering from the IIT Roorkee Roorkee in 2012. He began his academic career as a faculty member at HCST, Farah, Mathura, where he served for approximately one year. He has completed Ph.D. in the area of welding from IIT Roorkee in 2018. Following his Ph.D., Dr. Pandey joined SRM University as a faculty member in July 2018. Shortly thereafter, he joined to the IIT Jodhpur in April 2018, where he currently holds the position of Associate Professor. During his academic tenure, Dr. Pandey contributed to research activities at IIT Jodhpur, broadening his expertise in welding, weld testing, materials characterization, and residual stress analysis. Over the past six years, Dr. Pandey has successfully supervised 06 PhDs and over 12 M.Tech. theses. His contributions to the field have been recognized through several prestigious honors, including the INAE Young Associateship (2024) and the Institution of Engineers (India) Young Engineers Award (2023–24).


Ongoing Projects

Faculty Members are involved in research projects supported by various funding agencies. Some of the prominent ongoing Research Projects include:


1) C. Venkatesan, PI

Project: Design and Development of an Indigenous Autopilot for Quadrotors Suril Shah and Arpit Khandelwal, Co-PI

Status: Ongoing

Description: Main focus of this project is the development of an indigenous autopilot for an aerial vehicle capable of hover. Characterization of brushless motors, development, and testing of control algorithm for stabilization of quadrotors are carried out in the custom-designed test rigs. Programs for autonomous navigation of vehicle in outdoor environment are also developed. The software architecture, hardware selection, and integration, and source code for all tasks are fully developed in the helicopter laboratory.


2) Chandan Pandey, PI

Project: Mitigation of weldability issues and residual stresses in dissimilar welded joints of ultra-supercritical power plants

Status: Ongoing

Description: The present work investigates the weldability, metallurgical and mechanical behavior of the dissimilar martensitic P92 and austenitic Ss304 L steel joints produced by the gas tungsten arc welding process employing the IN617 and IN625 filler metal.


3)  Shobhana Singh, PI

Project: Heat transfer enhancement in heat exchangers

Status: Ongoing

Description: Fin and tube heat exchangers are widely used in the industry because of the heat exchanger required for a specific heat transfer load compared to the one with plain fin and therefore decreased material costs for the manufacturer. This project focuses on heat transfer enhancement in heat exchangers by various passive design strategies. These strategies enhancing the flow in a way that turbulence is only created in areas where it is the most beneficial. This is done by utilizing vortex generators or other guide vanes to create longitudinal vortices to the flow. Furthermore, advanced fin patterns or configurations provide considerable heat transfer enhancement with reasonable pressure loss.

 Project: Development of Controlled Solar Dryer System

Status: Ongoing

Description: No single dryer technology is appropriate for all users and for all conditions as the performance varies under varied operating conditions. Different types of dryers are utilized for drying different food products (fruits, vegetables, grains, etc.) under different operating conditions. In this project, an improved solar dryer system is being developed which can be used to dry a variety of products for different applications. In addition to the enhanced drying efficiency, the improved system will have several unique features that make the design highly cost-competitive and entirely environmentally friendly.
 4)  Hardik Kothadia, PI

Project: Performance Testing of Air-Cooled Condenser Tube Bundles along with Establishing Their Theoretical Correlation

Status: Ongoing

Description: Water shortage was the main obstacle to the construction of the power plants near the arid areas. In these areas, the ACCs (air-cooled condensers) offer great advantages. ACCs consist of an array of fan units whose function is to condense the steam. A change in the heat rejection rate directly influences the output of the steam turbine. Therefore, it is essential to understand and predict the factors and mechanisms that affect the heat rejection rate of ACCs.
 Project: Experimental study of pool boiling on conventional, mini and micro tubes

Status: Ongoing

Description: The magnitude of latent heat of vaporisation of liquid is higher as compared to its specific heat. This become a major factor for implementing two phase heat transfer mechanisms in cooling techniques. Pool boiling is cost effective, simple and prevalent amongst all available two-phase cooling schemes. Scarcity of quantitative data, qualitative theories and explanations in the area of mini and micro tubes makes them an interesting domain of research. Moreover, the conventional tubes have many industrial applications. The study includes derivation of correlations for heat transfer coefficient and critical heat flux.
 Project: Design of Vortex Flow Generator to Optimize the Heat Transfer Enhancement in a Straight Tube

Status: Ongoing

Description: Heat exchange is an integral part of all processes in the present era. Improvement in the performance of heat exchanger leads to substantial energy cost savings. The inserts are used as passive enhancement methods which do not require external power. The research objective is to determine the thermal performance of straight tubes with different inserts. Effect of different enhancement methods on wall temperature distribution and spatial variation in heat transfer coefficient is analysed. The best suitable methods with high heat transfer enhancement will be identified from the study. The concept will apply to develop a high-performance heat exchanger.


5)  Rahul Chhibber, PI

Project: Design and development of SMAW electrode coatings for dissimilar metal welds in USC/AUSC applications

Status: Ongoing

Description: This project aims to develop SMAW electrode coatings to join different steels which are used in the thermal power plant application. Candidate materials used in this study are P22 (Ferritic Steel), P91 (Martensitic Steel), SS304L (Austenitic steel) and Inconel-617. Electrode coatings were developed to fabricate P22/P91, P91/SS304 and SS304/IN-617 dissimilar welds. Experimentation was performed to evaluate the microstructural changes and mechanical characterization which includes hardness profile, tensile strength, the impact strength of the base materials, as well as dissimilar welds.

Design-and-development-of-SMAW-electrode-coatings
 Project: High temperature molten salt corrosion investigations on power plant boiler materials and their dissimilar welds.

Status: Ongoing

Description: This project aims to study the high temperature corrosion behavior of boiler grade steels and alloys under the exposure of aggressive molten salt mixtures. Candidate materials used in this investigation are P22 (Ferritic Steel), P91 (Martensitic Steel), SS304L (Austenitic steel) and Inconel-617. The hot corrosion investigations are performed on the base materials as well as P22/P91, P91/SS304 and SS304/IN-617 dissimilar welds.

 Project: Experimental Investigations on Dissimilar Metal Weld for Offshore Application

Status: Ongoing

Description: This project aims at fabrication and experimental characterization of dissimilar super duplex stainless steel 2507/high strength low alloy API X70 weld used in hydrocarbon drilling risers and oil-gas pipelines. Welds have been fabricated using SMAW and GTAW processes. Effect of austenitic 309L and super duplex 2594 filler wires has been studied on mechanical and microstructural behavior of fabricated welds. SMAW electrode coatings have been developed and suggested as an alternative to commercially available ones. The sustainable engineering approach has been followed by utilizing iron ore mineral waste red ochre in the electrode coating composition.
 6)  Nipun Arora, PI

Project: Aerodynamic investigation of 3D “clap and fling” motion with lattice Boltzmann Method

Status: Ongoing

Description: This study focuses on the analysis of the fluid dynamics associated with the flapping motion employed mostly by tiny insects which operate in low Reynolds number regime. Wing-wake interaction leads to an increase in lift and “clap-and-fling” produces higher lift as compared to hovering and is therefore used by most small insects such as Drosophila melanogaster. A three-dimensional lattice Boltzmann numerical model mimicking the insect kinematics will be developed to probe the aerodynamics.

Project: Experimental Investigation of a Dynamically Scaled Flapping Wing Micro Air Vehicle

Status: Ongoing

Description: The aim of this project is to study the operational regimes of flapping wing MAV for given planform design through conducting experiments on a dynamically scaled wing in water with different wing kinematics and to identify the optimum flapping parameters. In this regard, the focus will be on improving the aerodynamic performance and efficiency of a flapping wing by quantification of lift and drag with the help of six-axis Force/Torque transducer. Other than the wing kinematics, the aerodynamic efficiency of a flapping wing MAV can be increased by improvements in wing design and/or decreasing its weight by using lightweight materials.

Project: Computational hemodynamics and rheological models for blood flow

Status: Ongoing

Description: Cerebro- and cardio-vascular diseases remain the leading cause of mortality in the world and are linked to hemodynamics. CFD simulations using medical image based geometries have a huge potential as a tool for diagnosis and treatment. This work aims to present different models used in lattice Boltzmann Method to model blood as a viscoelastic Non-Newtonian fluid to understand the complex rheological nature of blood upon the dynamics of cerebral and cardiovascular diseases.

Project: Development of lattice Boltzmann solver to study electrorheolgical fluids

Status: On-going

Description: ER fluids are complex particle-laden flows whose rheology is strongly influenced by the presence of an electric or magnetic field. The viscosity of smart fluids increases by an order of and restored back within milliseconds and has applications in mechanical devices (valves, dampers, brakes, etc.), the biomedical sector (reduction in blood viscosity, blood clotting, etc.). A fully parallel particle fluid interaction numerical framework comprising of combined discrete element - lattice Boltzmann method (DEM-LBM) will be developed to examine the electrorheological (ER) behavior.

Project: Aerodynamic noise reduction of a flapping wing unmanned aerial vehicle

Status: Proposed

Description: Noiseless locomotion is a prerequisite of unmanned aerial vehicles, especially when spying in enemy terrains and not significant attention has been paid on this aspect. Owls have distinctive wing morphologies that enable an inaudible flapping flight and can be a guiding principle for designing the next-generation UAVs. An in-house numerical flow solver based on the entropic lattice Boltzmann method (ELBM) will be developed to perform the turbulence simulations and examine the aerodynamics of owl flight. The noise generation due to flapping can be measured with the help of aeroacoustics solver based on the Ffowcs-Williams-Hawkings (FWH) equation.


7) Jaiveer Singh, PI

Project: Design and development of novel BCC and FCC high entropy alloys (HEAs) for structural high-temperature applications

Status: Proposed

Description: This project aims to develop novel BCC and FCC high entropy alloys (HEAs) for structural high-temperature applications such as airborne parts, turbine engine blades, shipbuilding, etc. HEAs will be developed using a vacuum induction casting technique. The homogenized and subsequently cold-rolled specimens will be used for the evolution of microstructure and recrystallization kinetics during thermo-mechanical processing of developed HEAs. Electron back-scattered diffraction (EBSD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) combined with the energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) mode of electron probe microanalysis (EPMA), and X-ray diffraction (XRD) will be used for the microstructural and textural characterization.

Project: Investigation of the process-induced residual stresses during machining of Tungsten and its alloys Kaushal A. Desai and Rajesh K. Khatirkar, Co-PI

Status: Proposed

Description: The objective of this project is to relate stress development and relief with local microstructural changes associated with the manufacturing process. The study also aims to develop an appropriate multi-scale evaluation method linking residual stress (RS) acting at the macroscopic scale, with an underlying microstructure where RS originate. Moreover, the optimization of processing parameters during the manufacturing process such as turning operation under dry and wet lubrication conditions to provide a better surface finish which will attribute to low or compressive RS and high material removal rate (MRR). In this proposed project, Taguchi's method will be applied to determine optimal parametric combinations and to investigate the influence of various turning parameters such as cutting speed, feed rate, and depth of cut on surface roughness (Ra) and MRR to achieve better machining performance.


8) Arun Kumar R, PI

Project: Shock Wave Interaction with Various Interfaces

Status: Ongoing

Description: Shock or blast waves are high intense pressure waves generated due to large deposition of energy over a finite space, like in an explosion. In recent times, shock waves were utilized for many ‘constructive’ applications especially in biomedical engineering, like the needles vaccine delivery, shock wave lithotripsy, and wound healing. In all these applications a controlled shock wave propagating through air or body fluid is made to interact with the tissues, resulting in shock wave interaction with interfaces separated by two mediums. The interaction of shock wave with interface causes subsequent reflection and refraction of the wave leading to localized pressure jump and complex shock patterns which are not yet properly understood. The present study thus focuses on the shock wave interaction characteristics with interfaces produced by various mediums using experimental studies.
 Project: Cross Flow Flapping Jets for Supersonic Mixing Enhancement

Status: Ongoing

Description: This research aims to advance the frontiers of supersonic air-fuel mixing, particularly in the context of cross flow injection. The present study explores novel methods to enhance the efficiency of cross flow injection, particularly by inducing the cross flow jet to flap. A flapping cross flow jet is expected to increase the cross flow momentum and turbulence which enhances the mixing characteristics. In the present study, various active and passive control strategies will be investigated to create flapping cross flow jets. A detailed investigation of various flow characteristics, such as, turbulence production, vortex structure and shock interactions etc. are also planned to be carried out using experimental and computational studies.


9) Sudipto Mukhopadhyay, PI

Project: Development of Highly Efficient Low Cost Insulation for Power Plants

Status: Ongoing

Description: Thermal Insulation serves a crucial role in power plant industry. The aim of this project is to find out effectiveness of various thermal insulation materials as installed on gas turbines. The project also aims to fabricate a cost effective yet efficient insulation material. 
 10) Prodyut Chakraborty, PI

Project: Cascaded Latent Heat Storage (CLHS) for high temperature CSP applications: material development and characterization to lab-scale setup

Status: Ongoing

Description: The design of latent heat-based thermal storage is one of the less developed areas and has a huge potential for high temperature solar thermal applications. Very few existing solar thermal plants in the world have the testing facility for thermal storage systems, and the existence of testing facilities with latent heat storage systems is even fewer. The design of latent heat-based thermal storage aims at achieving stringent heat transfer requirements with optimal compactness and reliability. Cascaded latent heat storage (CLHS) is one of the best possible ways of storing thermal energy in the latent heat form allowing minimum consumption of storage material.
 Project: Shrinkage induce flow and shrinkage defect evolving during solidification of pure substance

Status: Ongoing

Description: Although shrinkage during solidification is fundamental phenomena, Analytical and numerical models associated with the physics is underdeveloped till date. The project aims at developing physics-based analytical and numerical models to capture the effect of shrinkage on casting products during the solidification process of pure and alloy materials.
 Project: Thermal modeling of PCM cool vest and warm jacket

Status: Completed

Description: The extreme climate can vary core body temperatures (~37 0C) beyond a normal band of ± 10C. This variation can result in life-threatening consequences. The phase change material (PCM) based cool & warm vests can provide thermal comfort to persons working in extreme hot & cold climate respectively. The project aims at the design and development of warm and cool vests consisting of warm or cool PCM packs optimally located within the vest, along with the development of thermal manikin. The major challenge is developing a multi-scale model for the solidification of undercooled PCM covering nucleation to dendritic growth to macro-scale solidification features.
 Project: Parabolic dish solar cooker- An alternative design approach towards achieving high grade thermal energy storage solution

Status: Ongoing

Description: Parabolic dish concentrator based solar cooker is a highly promising alternative green technology suitable for a wide variety of cooking involving grilling, frying, simmering and boiling (temperature range of 250-350 ). The utilization of solar energy reduces dependence on fossil fuels, resulting lower carbon footprints. Development and integration of a compact thermal storage cum cooking unit involving latent heat thermal energy storage (LHTES) plays a crucial role to overcome the severe limitation associated with the duration and availability of solar irradiation. The project aims at design and development of a market ready solar cooker capable of cooking not only during on-sun hours but also during off-sun period.


11) Anand Plappally, PI

Project: Local composite geo-textile mats for soil and water conservation in Western Rajasthan

Status: Completed

Description: In this study the geotextile mats of different size specifications were manufactured from ropes derived of different shrubs locally found in Thar Desert. Further specifically, strength parameters for Crotalaria Burhia are vetted against the other local natural and inorganic synthetic fibres used for similar purposes such as Leptadenia Pyrotechnica and Calotropis Procera. It is implicated from the study that Crotalaria Burhia is better and more viable for rope, rooftop cover and mat production.

Project: Run-of-River based Water Wheel at Kelia Village, Junagarh, Kalahandi, Odisha

Status: Completed

Description: In this project, a water wheel is designed and installed over an irrigation canal flowing through Kelia Village, Junagarh, at Kalahandi, Odisha. The installation is appended with a complete gear box and centrifugal turbo-pump of 3hp to lift water from the downstream of the canal. A one and half year operation and maintenance study is also performed. Civil engineering construction of the run-of-river model was also performed.

Project: Truncated Unglazed Percolative Clay Ceramic Ware as a Modified Pitcher Irrigation System

Status: Completed

Description: In this project, a new modification to traditional sub-surface irrigation to enable faster rate of saline soil remediation was performed. This is a new form of subsurface porous vessel-based irrigation technology where leaching is optimized in order to enable plant to grow in conditions of high saline soils.

Project: AWEP Management Through ICT

Status: Completed

Description: In this project, a micro-irrigation of okra and eggplant was performed using a bed-planting strategy of farming. An automated irrigation system was developed and showcased. New low-cost automation box with wireless protocols were developed using SMS based farm management tactics. Water and energy management in agriculture using automation and agricultural landscape modification was practicalized. Tablet-based personalized farmer information on farm management and weather was also illustrated.


12) Shrutidhara Sarma, PI

Project: Nanocomposite fibers for sensing purposes

Status: Proposed

Description: Developing low powered, flexible temperature sensor having high sensitivity and low response time still remains a challenge. Compatible fillers in appropriate concentration within a polymer matrix can bring significant changes in sensor’s performance. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have exceptional mechanical strength, abrasion resistance, thermal and electrical properties although their homogenous dispersion is strenuous due to its non-reactant nature. This project aims at deeper study on CNT-polymer compatibility and their dispersion to produce highly conducting nanocomposite fibers that could be used for fabrication of efficient flexible temperature sensors.
 13) Amrita Puri, PI

Project: Active control of noise in vibro-acoustic cavities

Status: Ongoing

Description: In active noise control (ANC), secondary noise field is generated by ANC controller such that interference of primary and secondary noise field creates desired sound field. In local ANC, noise at some particular locations is attempted to reduce whereas in global ANC, noise levels throughout the cavity is attempted to reduce. The aim of this project is to develop the efficient active and adaptive algorithms for local and global ANC in vibro-acoustic cavities and its implementation for various practical applications like automotive cabins etc.


14) Ankur Gupta, PI

Project: In-house Development of Pulse µ-electroforming Set-up to Fabricate High Surface Area Multiscale Structures

Status: Ongoing

Description: In this project, we aim to design and develop pulse electroforming experimental set-up. With this set-up, fabrication of high aspect ratio structures will be performed. Further, various functional metal/metal oxide high aspect micro/nano-structures with aqueous chemical synthesis route over electroform will also fabricated along with studies related to essential properties of fabricated structures with the help of various characterization techniques.
 Project: Design and development of true north finding set-up for defense applications

Status: Ongoing

Description: Measure of performance for a state-of-the-art radar system participating in critical tactical missile defense mission is very crucial from the accuracy perspective of the mission requirements. True north plays an important role in radar performance as target azimuth data is provided with reference to true north. So, this work proposes design and development of the In-house set-up for determining the true north for radar application, the measured data with the setup will be analyzed with the help of developed algorithm to determine the accurate true north angle. The proposed set-up will be capable to produce the results with high accuracy in mili-radian level.
 Project: Microfabrication assisted multi-step treatment and analysis of textile and antimicrobial manufacturing wastewater

Status: Ongoing

Description: With this project, we aim to offer solution to handle the environmental contamination particularly related to antimicrobial/textile waste obtained from pharmaceutical/textile industries with the help of electrochemical and nanotechnology-based mechanism in single in-house set-up unit equipped with monitoring sensors. This work includes: Design and fabrication of electrochemical processing set-up and filtration set-up having functional nanostructured platform for photocatalytic based degradation; Optimization of design parameters by modeling the fluid dynamics, its simulation and computational studies on absorption kinetics; Experimental investigation for the efficiency of the unit and performance evaluation for real water samples; Implementation of automation for assessing the quality of the treated sample and build whole system ready for a pilot plant to be used for industries.
 15) Suril V. Shah, PI

Project: Dynamic studies for Half-humanoid & Space flying robot

Status: Ongoing

Description: The autonomous operations with robotic systems are an essential component of space exploration missions. The Extravehicular activity (EVA) consumes time and requires a considerable load handling capacity and dexterity exceeding human capability. Realizing the benefits of space robots involves the challenging problem of dynamics, control and motion planning by considering the dynamic interaction between the robotic manipulator and the base (space station, space shuttle, or satellite). Due to the dynamic interaction, the motion of robotic manipulator alters the base trajectory in accordance with the conservation of linear and angular momenta. This mutual dependence severely affects the autonomous operations as well as the performance of both the robot arm and the base, especially when the mass and the moment of inertia of the robot arms are not negligible in comparison to the base. Also, in floating base robots, the kinematic mapping between joint space and inertial space depends on the dynamic parameters, such as mass and inertia. The robot manipulation using the combination of kinematics, dynamics and control to achieve the desired functionality is a major challenge. The energy-efficient path planning, dexterous manipulation and dynamic modeling for environmental interaction of half humanoid and space flying robot will be addressed.
 Project: Reactionless Maneuvering and Visual Servoing of Space flying robot and Half-humanoid

Status: Ongoing

Description: Future Space exploration missions evinces zero gravity as a major challenge for autonomous operations. In space environment, the motion of robotic manipulator mounted on a satellite base induces reactions on base due to dynamic coupling. The stationary attitude is desirable for uninterrupted communication and manipulation accuracy. The base attitude correction has been achieved with external motors but consumes high power. The energy efficient functioning of space robot requires new strategies for motion planning as manipulation without the use of attitude controllers is more robust. Researchers have focused on robotic manipulation with zero or minimal change in attitude, which is termed reactionless manipulation. Reactionless manipulation of a robot mounted on a satellite results in the fuel savings and increases the operating life of the system. On the other hand, visual servoing for autonomous operations has also attracted the attention of research community mainly due to its advantages over conventional control through teleportation. The literature work reported on visual servoing of a robot for autonomous operations assume that either the base is free-floating without any attitude control or base has active attitude control and such approach results in additional fuel consumption. The combination of reactionless manipulation and visual servoing can provide benefit of both, i.e., reduced fuel consumption and robust control. Such an approach, however, is seldom reported in literature for multi-arm robot. The reactionless manipulation and visual servoing with stringent requirement is a challenging task. The nano-satellite class (30 cm3) robot affects the path planning strategies and hence requires the specific design and development plan. This motivates to investigate reactionless manipulation and visual servoing of multi-arm space flying robot and half-humanoid. The work focuses on simulation studies and validation of the strategies on earth-based setup and integration to the future space missions.

Reactionless-Maneuvering-and-Visual-Servoing-of-Space-flying-robot
 16) B. Ravindra, PI

Project: Energy harvesting for Tire pressure monitoring sensors and other allied applications

Status: Ongoing

Description: Energy harvesting to power sensors is important in a number of applications. This project involves in powering Tire pressure monitoring sensors using vibrational energy. Material selection for vibration harvesters is an important aspect. Both soft and hard PZTs are considered. A lumped parameter model is used for PZT and support structure interaction. The design constraints such as space and packaging issues are taken into account. The limitations of lumped parameter models is also considered. Figures of merit for evaluating performance of PZT harvesters are also discussed. 


Completed Projects

Faculty Members of the Department have completed the following Sponsored Research Projects:


    1. Bifurcation and Stability Assessment of a Highly Lightweight Rotor-Bearing System with Moving Platform

        Science and Engineering Research Board, DST, Government of India

        Barun Pratiher, PI

        2014-17


    2. Hybrid reactionless manipulationand visual serving of a satellite mounted robot for autonomus on orbit services

        Department of Science & Technology (DST), Government of India

        Suril Shah, PI

        2013-18


    3. Singularity free reactionless manipulation of a satellite mounted dual-arm robot for capture of tumbling orbiting object

        Department of Science & Technology (DST), Government of India

        Suril Shah,

        PI 2013-16


    4. IOCL-BHEL-IITJ CSP Plant

        Indian Oil Corporation Limited

        Laltu Chandra, PI

        2012-15


    5. Establishment of the Centre of Excellence in Solar Thermal Research and Education

        Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, Government of India

        Laltu Chandra, PI

        2011-16

Collaborations

Faculty Members of the Department of Mechanical Engineering are keen to collaborate with individuals from academia, R&D laboratories and industry in India and abroad, in areas of mutual interest. These collaboration could include:

    Teaching of courses,
    Organizing short courses,
    Authoring of books,
    Undertaking research,
    Developing technologies.


Some of the current engagements are

Industry and R&D

    Ansys
    DRDO
    ISRO
    National Aerospace Laboratory
    Tata Steel
    Thermax


Academia

    Aalborg University (AAU), Denmark
    Sunchon National University, Korea
    Technion, Israel 


Welcome To The Department of Materials Engineering

The Department of Materials Engineering at IIT Jodhpur was established in 2017, and the Department is committed to high-quality education and research in the broad area of Materials Engineering. The Department continuously strives for excellence in teaching and research through innovative pedagogy and curriculum, by undertaking interdisciplinary projects, and through active collaborations with industries, R&D labs, and academia. By enabling the students to think independently and equipping them with relevant skill sets, our goal is to encourage the graduates to innovate and address present-day materials challenges to meet the needs of the country.

At present, the Department offers B.Tech., M.Tech., and Ph.D. programs. The Department's teaching and research activities cover four major streams- structural materials, functional materials, computational materials engineering, and process metallurgy. From structural materials to semiconductors, we attempt to understand the processing, composition and structure, properties, and performance of materials for deriving novel, effective, and sustainable alternatives. Currently, efforts are being made to introduce advanced concepts such as smart materials, additive manufacturing, artificial intelligence and machine learning, sensor materials, etc., as a part of solving interdisciplinary problems requiring Materials Engineering knowledge.

Head of the Department

The Department of Materials Engineering at IIT Jodhpur is working towards building future generation minds rich in skills and innovation to be the best in the outside world. Faculty Members in the department have expertise in diverse areas of Materials Engineering. They are actively involved in conducting translational research in the fundamental and applied areas of Materials Engineering. The department frequently organizes invited lectures and workshops to share research findings, train students on the state-of-the-art experimental and computational techniques to promote the development of skill sets.

The Department welcomes bright people who aspire to utilize the power of ambitious research and teaching to shape a better future.

    Materials Design and Processing
    Advanced Structural and Functional Materials
    Computational Materials Engineering
    Extractive and Process Metallurgy
    Materials Testing and Characterization


News & Newsletter

Sr. No. 	Description
1 	Admission to Ph.D. Programme, AY 2025-26 Semester I: Shortlisting of Candidates and Reporting Details (Round-2)
2 	List of Provisionally Selected PhD Candidates, AY 2025-26 Semester I
3 	Admission to Ph.D. Programme, AY 2025-26 Semester I: Shortlisting of Candidates and Reporting Details (Click to know more!)
4 	Admission to M.Tech. Programme (Non-Fellowship Categories), AY 2025-26: Shortlisting of Candidates and Reporting Details (Click to know more!)
5 	Admission to M.Tech.-Ph.D. Dual Degree Programme, AY 2024-25: Shortlisting of Candidates and Reporting Details
6 	Admission to Ph.D. Programme, AY 2024-25 Semester I: Shortlisting of Candidates and Reporting Details
7 	Admission to Ph.D. Programme, AY 2024-25 Semester II: Shortlisting of Candidates and Reporting Details 


Undergraduate Program
B.Tech. Program in Materials Engineering

The Department of Materials Engineering at IIT Jodhpur envisions to impart high-quality education in the areas of Materials Engineering to address continuously evolving demands of new materials in the fast evolving sectors such as, energy, aerospace, defence, healthcare, transport, etc. The B.Tech. program in Materials Engineering is designed to impart high-quality education in the core and emerging areas of Materials Engineering through a unique combination of foundational courses, core courses and electives from the following four thematic areas or streams

    Structural Materials
    Functional Materials
    Computational Materials Engineering
    Process Metallurgy

In the B.Tech. curriculum, an emphasis is given to the emerging areas in materials engineering such as computational materials engineering, energy materials, and advanced structural materials while ensuring sufficient core Materials Engineering courses that will form a solid base to the students. Demand driven areas such as Machine Learning, Data Structure and Algorithm, and Scientific Computations have been made an integral part of the B.Tech. curriculum, which makes this curriculum unique. To enable the students to pursue their interest, the program structure would allow students to optionally specialize in one of the above-mentioned four streams of Materials Engineering. This program will equip the students with experimental and computational skill sets relevant to the industry and will motivate the graduates to address present day materials challenges of designing, processing, characterization, and evaluation of advanced materials. Additionally, the program structure would also allow a unique opportunity to obtain an Interdisciplinary Specialization, or a Minor in the demand driven areas. Also, the students with inclination towards business will have an option to earn a B.Tech.-MBA degree making the following options available to a student through the UG program in Materials Engineering:

B.Tech. [Regular] Materials Engineering
B.Tech. in Materials Engineering with Department Specialization in

    Structural Materials
    Functional Materials
    Computational Materials Engineering
    Process Metallurgy


B.Tech. in Materials Engineering with Interdisciplinary Specialization in

    Artificial Intelligence (AI)
    Energy Materials
    Smart Healthcare
    Robotics
    Cyber Physical Systems
    Quantum Information
    Science of Intelligence


B.Tech. in Materials Engineering with Minor in

    Data and Computational Science
    Management Entrepreneurship

B.Tech - M.Tech Dual Degree (5-Years)
B.Tech.-MBA (5-years)


Objective of the program

    To impart education on the core concepts in Materials Engineering along with providing sufficient breadth of knowledge in the traditional as well as emerging areas of materials engineering
    To train students on experimental techniques for studying materials engineering
    To provide students sufficient analytical and computational skills to address materials engineering needs
    To introduce an early sense of attitude towards technology development and its lifecycle
    To inculcate an attitude towards the commitment to engineering ethics, continued learning, and professional development
    To enable students to optionally specialize in one of the four areas of focus:
    Structural materials
    Functional materials
    Computational materials engineering
    Process metallurgy


Expected Graduate Attributes

    The graduates of the B.Tech. program in Materials Engineering will be expected to have
    Understanding of atomic structure, crystal structure and imperfections in materials
    Ability to understand the physical and chemical phenomena or process through thermodynamic and kinetic principles
    Ability to understand the relation between electronic band structure and electrical, optical, and magnetic properties of materials
    Broad knowledge on processing of materials and manufacturing, and basic skills to characterize the microstructure
    Ability to correlate processing-structure-property-performance of materials and their processing
    Knowledge about the process of extraction of ferrous and non-ferrous metals
    Ability to use various simulation tools to design materials and predict material behaviour for a better understanding of materials
    Ability to design and execute technical projects
    Skills to communicate materials engineering concepts and ideas to peers
    Appreciation and adherence to professional ethics


Learning Outcomes

    Ability to apply principles of thermodynamics and kinetics to understand, design and process advanced materials
    Ability to use computational and analytical modelling techniques to predict various properties of materials
    Ability to use materials testing and characterization techniques to validate structure-property-performance correlation in materials at various length scales
    Understanding of electronic structure of materials and ability to correlate electronic structure with transport properties of materials
    Knowledge of processing parameters for the extraction of ferrous and non-ferrous metals, and knowledge to comprehend the process cycle to convert raw material to a final product
    Ability to understand materials processing and process scale up


Doctoral Programs
Ph.D. Programme in Materials Engineering
Introduction

The Ph.D. program is a demanding, world-class research program in the area of advanced materials science and engineering, designed to address present-day technological challenges in the emerging areas of energy, security, defense, healthcare, space, etc. The Ph.D. students undergo rigorous research training on experimental and computational materials science and engineering through industry-relevant projects emphasizing both fundamental sciences as well as applications in various technological domains. The comprehensive and innovative syllabus at IIT Jodhpur will provide exposure to the core concepts. At the same time, the well-designed handson training in the well-equipped laboratories develops high-end skill sets and nurture innovative ideas through challenging Ph.D. research projects. Ph.D. students in our department are prepared to assume leadership roles in academia, industry, and research institutions.


Objective of the program

    To provide rigorous training to identify the existing knowledge gaps and formulate research problem of the modern-day need
    To integrate critical reasoning and analytical skills with computational approaches for solving the materials engineering problems
    To train students to use appropriate experimental techniques for studying materials 
    To inculcate an attitude towards the commitment to engineering ethics, continued learning and professional development


Expected Graduate Attribute

    Ability to interact with researchers and be professionals with leadership and mentoring capabilities
    Ability to understand the basic principles of thermodynamics and kinetics of materials 
    Ability to understand the relation between electronic band structure and electrical, optical and magnetic properties
    Ability to process materials and fabricate components following various manufacturing processes, and characterize the microstructure
    Ability to correlate processing-structure-property-performance
    Ability to use different simulation tools for a better understanding of materials
    Ability to understand the basic principles of material science and engineering to design new materials and processing routes as per the application 
    Ability to design and execute technical projects
    Skills to communicate engineering concepts and ideas to peers
    Appreciation and adherence to professional ethics


Learning Outcome

    Ability to apply thermodynamics and kinetics principles to understand, design and process advanced materials  
    Ability to use computational and analytical modeling techniques to design materials and predict various properties of materials
    Ability to use materials testing and characterization techniques to validate structureproperty-performance correlation in materials at various length scales
    Ability to determine processing parameters for extraction of ferrous and non-ferrous metals, and design process cycle to convert raw material to a final product
    Ability to fabricate components following traditional and emerging manufacturing processes

Faculty Members
Bhabani K Satapathy
 About

Dr. Bhabani K. Satapathy is a professor in the Department of Materials Engineering. He did his Ph.D. from IIT Delhi in the area of polymer composites and specifically on the tribological aspects of composites for automotive braking applications. He subsequently pursued his research career as a Postdoctoral fellow at Leibniz Institute of Polymer Research Dresden (IPF Dresden) and in Mechanics of Functional Materials (MfM) group of Institute of Material Science and Technology at Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany. He also has an M. Tech. degree in Polymer Science and Engineering from IIT Delhi. His main research interests are on phase behaviour, tribology and fracture mechanics of polymer based blends, composites, block copolymers and allied materials. 

Research Interests:

Morphology and Phase Behaviour of Block Copolymers, Polymer Blends and Composites, Micromechanics, Fracture and Fatigue of Polymer Nano-composites, Tribology of Polymer Based Materials, Biotribology, Thermo-Mechanical Behaviour of Biomaterials.

Ravi K R
 About

 

Dr. Ravi K R is a Professor at IIT Jodhpur. He completed his B.Tech. in Metallurgical Engineering at Madras University. He completed his PhD. in Metallurgical and Materials Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur in 2009.

Dr. Ravi K R works in the broad areas of Additive Manufacturing, Computational thermodynamics in alloy design, Biodegradable magnesium alloys, and Self-cleaning coating.

Abir Bhattacharyya
 About

Dr. Abir Bhattacharyya is an Associate Professor at  IIT Jodhpur. He completed his M.E. in Materials Engineering at the Indian Institute of Science in 2011. He completed his PhD. in Mechanical Engineering at the University of Florida in 2015

Jaiveer Singh
 About

Dr. Jaiveer Singh is an Associate Professor in the Department of Materials Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. He is also an affiliate faculty and a Program Management Committee member of the Centre for Medical Technologies at IIT Jodhpur. His research primarily focuses on microstructure and texture evolution, thermo-mechanical processing, mechanical behavior of materials, and the design and development of light alloys and biomaterials. He is also actively involved in research on additive manufacturing technologies used for patient-specific implants.

Before joining IIT Jodhpur, Dr. Singh worked as a Research Professor at Sunchon National University, Suncheon, Republic of Korea. During his tenure there, he investigated deformation and fracture mechanisms in magnesium (Mg) alloys under mini-V-bending and Erichsen testing at room temperature. He received his Ph.D. in Metallurgical Engineering and Materials Science from IIT Bombay in 2015. His doctoral research focused on the microstructural and textural evolution during deformation in zirconium. To date, he has published more than 50 research articles in SCI/SCIE-indexed journals and has 5 patents filed. He also serves as a reviewer for several esteemed journals and international conferences.

Saurabh Nene
 About

Dr. Saurabh Sanjay Nene is an Associate Professor at IIT Jodhpur. He completed his M.Tech. at Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay in 2012. He completed his PhD. at Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay and Monash University Australia in 2016.

His field of research is: Alloy Design, Additive Manufacturing, HIgh Entropy Alloys, Friction Stir Welding and Processing

Abhay Gupta
 About

Dr. Abhay Gupta is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Materials Engineering at IIT Jodhpur. He completed his B. Tech degree from IIT Roorkee in 2014 and later obtained his M. Tech degree and Ph.D. in Materials Engineering from IISc Bangalore in 2022. His Ph.D. research work primarily focused on the correlation between electrochemical and microstructural properties within electroplated Tin-based coatings.

Before joining IIT Jodhpur, he was a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Lorraine, France, and the University of Quebec, Canada. During his postdoctoral research, he focused on clean energy technologies, with a particular emphasis on green hydrogen production. His work focuses on proton exchange membrane (PEM) water electrolyzers, including the development of electrodes, the study of oxygen evolution reaction (OER) catalysts, and the enhancement of device performance through coatings for porous transport layers (PTLs) and bipolar plates (BPPs). He also examines corrosion behaviour in electrolyzer environments and material durability under prolonged operation.

Dr. Abhay has also worked in the R&D divisions of L&T Green Energy, Mumbai, and Tata Steel's Metaliks Division, Kharagpur, after completing his Ph.D., and at SAIL, Bokaro, after obtaining his B.Tech degree.

The primary focus of his research group is:

    Performance evaluation of PEM electrolyzer components for green hydrogen production.
    Electrode fabrication for water electrolyzers.
    Electrochemistry – corrosion analysis. 

Amitava Banerjee

About

Dr. Amitava Banerjee is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Materials Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur (IITJ). He joined IITJ in December 2021 after completing his postdoc as a Director's Postdoctoral Fellow in the Materials Science and Technology Division at Los Alamos National Laboratory, USA. Dr. Banerjee earned his Ph.D. in materials modeling for energy conversion and storage from Uppsala University, Sweden, in 2019. For his Ph.D. thesis, he received the Graduate Student Silver Award from the Materials Research Society (MRS), USA and the "Bjurzons Premium" prize from Uppsala University for the best Ph.D. thesis in the natural sciences. He completed his M.Tech. from IIT Kanpur, with CGPA of 10 out of 10, and was honored with both the Academic Excellence Award and the Gold Medal from IIT Kanpur, as well as recognition from the Indian Institute of Metals (IIM) with Gold Medal. Dr. Banerjee also holds an M.Sc. in Materials Science, graduating with first position with distinction from Sardar Patel University in Gujarat. Additionally, he earned a B.Sc. in Industrial Chemistry, finishing in first class—first position from Ramakrishna Mission Vidyamandira in Belur Math, under Calcutta University.

Overview of Research Domain

Dr. Banerjee specializes in density functional theory, molecular dynamics, and materials informatics for designing catalysts for solar fuel production and storage. He employs genetic algorithms to screen organic structures for battery electrodes and studies defect thermodynamics and kinetics to understand oxide growth. He has developed several computational methodologies for designing energy materials. In a board, Dr. Banerjee's research focuses on materials modelling for oxide growth (material degradation), energy conversion, and storage using the avant-grade computational method.

More specifically on:

    Random structure search 
    Solar fuel production, photocatalyst- Water Splitting
    Catalytic reaction mechanism (HER, OER, ORR, NRR, CO2 reduction)
    Hybrid perovskites solar cell-structural modification and stability
    Organic crystal structure search for organic green battery
    Thermodynamics and kinetics of battery/supercapacitor material
    Oxide growth: Formation and transport of cationic and anionic defects in the oxide
    Diffusion through metal-oxide interface and grain-boundary
    2D Materials, 3D porous structures for various application
    Nano-grinding/surface finishing of ceramic materials

Anurag Sharma
 About

Dr. Anurag Sharma is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Materials Engineering (jointly with Mechanical Engineering) at IIT Jodhpur. He obtained his Ph.D. in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering from Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore (2021–2025). He earned his M.Tech. in Materials Science and Engineering from IIT Gandhinagar (2019–2021) and holds a B.Tech. (Honors) in Mechanical Engineering from Government Engineering College Ajmer (2015–2019).

His Ph.D. research primarily focused on enhancing the cyclic and impact performance of thermoplastic composites using filler reinforcement. During his doctoral studies, he gained collaborative research experience with Leonardo Helicopters and the Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore. He has received several notable accolades, including the NTU Research Scholarship and the IITGN Institute Fellowship.

At IIT Jodhpur, his research focuses on advancing composite materials for next-generation structural components. His research interests include fiber-reinforced thermoplastic composites; fatigue and impact behavior of composites; multifunctional composite design; composite manufacturing and processing; structural testing; and damage mechanics and failure analysis. His work aims to develop high-performance, lightweight, and sustainable composite materials through innovative design, manufacturing, and performance evaluation.

Ongoing Projects 
Deep-Tech Biodesign Centre: A Multi-disciplinary centre to train, nurture and transform clinicians and engineers into the Deep-Tech innovators in the field of Medical/Health Technology
Optical based in-situ monitoring for porosity detection during laser cladding and additive manufacturing of stainless steel
Developing Endoscope Socket to provide uninterpreted endoscopic visual field to ENT doctor for diagnosing patients with minimal discomfort.
Oxidation and quenching studies of Zry-4 clad material with and without coating
Designing lightweight and highly formable Mg-Li/Zn/Ca-RE based alloys using the CALPHAD method
Design and processing of non-corrosive and cost-effective complex concentrated alloys (CCAs) for biomedical applications
Novel 2-D nanostructures involving borophene and clay, their, organic and inorganic hybrids, and heterostructures for optoelectronic, magneto-optics photo/eletrocatalysis, and water purifications
A Non-invasive Breath Analyser for Kidney Dysfunction Screening
Large Scale Synthesis of Borophene for Energy Storage Application
Development of Ti-HEA with high strength and formability at room and high temperatures
Boron Carbide coating on graphitic tiles for first wall protection of ADITYA_U Tokamak
Effect of rolling parameters for improving electrical conductivity of Al alloys
Effect of rolling on mechanical properties of Cu-Ti Alloy Strips
Design of next generation superalloys for 3D printed turbine components
Molecularly engineered free standing Borophene as a versatile Nanotheranostics platform to combat localized cancers
Sb2S3 Photovoltaic Device: Pioneering Interface Engineering and Optoelectronic Properties Enhancement
Chalcogenide-Perovskite (BaZrS3) based Photovoltaic Devices
Design and development of an indigenous two-photon polymerization equipment for 3D printing of nanostructures.
Integrated application of in-situ monitoring, CALPHAD modeling, and ultrasonic treatment for predicting and mitigating the porosity and hot tearing defects formed during the additive manufacturing of Inconel 718 and AlSi10Mgalloys
The Effects of Shot Peening Parameters on Residual Stress Evolution in a Through-Hardened and a Case-Hardened Aerospace Bearing Steel
Design and Development of Advanced High Strength Steel for Enhanced Performance in Aero-engine Gears.

Completed Projects 
Development of Transparent, Durable superhydrophobic-coating for self-cleaning of Endoscope
Novel in-situ volume contractible metal halide negative electrodes for high performance lithium-ion batteries
Understanding the deformation mechanisms under in-plane shear and role of pre-twinning on formability behavior of AZ31-xCa Mg alloy sheets
Study of the Effects of Stress-State and Strain-Rate on Constitutive Response of Polymer Gels via Experiments and Continuum Mechanics Modeling
Thermoelectric Performance Study Using First-Principles Calculations Based Methods
Design and Fabrication of Indigenous Powder Fed Metal Additive Manufacturing Machine
Quantitative assessment of Hot tearing characteristics of Aerospace Magnesium Alloys
Differential Phase Contrast in Electron Magnetic Circular Dichroism in Transmission Electron Microscopy
Large Scale Synthesis of Freestanding 2D Borophene Atomic Sheets and its Hybrids for Conducting Tapes
A High-Throughput Structure-Sensitive Designing of Electrocatalysts for Next-generation Alternative Fuel-"Green Ammonia"-Synthesis
Grain boundary engineering for improvement of high temperature strength and ductility in FCC alloys for structural applications
Investigation of weldability and hydrogen embrittlement phenomenon in high-strength bainitic steel
Design of ultralight, cost-effective high entropy alloys with transformation induced plasticity
Development of High Capacity Advanced Borophene Oxide based Supercapacitor


Collaborations

    CSIR National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR-NML)
    Indira Gandhi Center for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam (IGCAR, Kalpakkam)
    Metallizing Equipment Co. Pvt. Ltd. (MECPL)
    Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory, Hyderabad (DMRL, Hyderabad)
    National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology, Trivandrum (NIIST, Trivandrum)
    Vectraform engineering & solutions pvt ltd, Coimbatore
    Oil India Limited, Jodhpur


Welcome To The Department of Physics

The subject of Physics is inherently a natural science subject based on strong theoretical foundations and experimental findings. The subject closely intersects with almost all the branches of engineering and the current research activities of physics across the world made a huge impact on new, advanced, and emerging technologies. Keeping these facts into consideration, our Department is committed to imparting high-quality education based on a strong academic curriculum comprising elements of theoretical concepts, laboratory experiments, and most importantly hands-on experiments. The graduates of the Department are expected to have deep insight into the domain of Physics together with a strong bent of mind to pursue cutting-edge research and translate it into technology.

We offer a broad range of undergraduate and postgraduate programs. Our 4 Year BS in Physics with specialization is a technology-oriented science program and offers specialization in physics-based emerging technology domains. The program also has the flexibility to convert into a 5 Year BS + M.Tech. dual degree course. At the postgraduate level, we have four-degree programs viz. M.Sc. (2 years), M.Sc.-M.Tech Dual Degree in Physics and Materials Engineering. The dual degree program also has additional two specializations namely Functional Materials and Computational Materials Engineering. Finally, our Ph.D. program empowers scholars to pursue research in various domains.
Research Areas

The department has a very good blend of highly qualified young and experienced faculty members in the areas of advanced physics. The department is also equipped with a number of thematic laboratories which enable the students to carry out high-end and impactful theoretical and applied research in the following focus areas:

High Energy Physics and Astrophysics

Theoretical research in domains; Flavour physics, Astrophysics, Particle physics, Cosmology, and Dark matter and Dark energy. Experimental research in flavor physics with the Belle II Experiment.

Quantum Physics

Open Quantum Systems, Theoretical and Experimental aspects of Quantum Optics & Quantum Information, Quantum Field Theory, Quantum Statistical Mechanics and Quantum Cosmology.

Condensed Matter and Plasma Physics Group

Experimental and Theoretical Research on Molecular electronics, Organic electronics, Cold Plasma Technologies and applications, Energy Storage, Solar cells, Light emitting diodes, Solar water splitting, Soft Matters, Statistical Physics, Computational Physics, Multiscale Modelling, Phase ordering dynamics, Glasses, Amorphous solids, Polymers and Solid Electrolyte materials, Physics of Living Matter, Active Matter Physics, Functional Materials, Materials Design and Engineering, Nanomagnetism and Multiferroics.

Optics and Photonics

Theoretical and Experimental Research in Nano Photonics, Light in disordered media, Ultrafast Optics, Nonlinear Optics, Topological Singularities, Specially Optical Fibers, Photonic sensors, Time Dynamic systems, Terahertz generation and application, Transient and Steady-state Spectroscopy, Bound state in the continuum, Disorder Photons and Light Matter Interaction and Ceramic materials for high energy laser applications.

Candidates interested in pursuing Ph.D., please go through the Research groups and visit the individual faculty's home pages. The application can be submitted with this link.
Infrastructure

The department is equipped with high-end research equipment which includes SQUID magnetometer, Physical Property Measurement Systems (PPMS), Raman Spectrometer, and Scanning Tunnelling Microscope (STM) besides a host of other advanced characterization equipment which is available at the Centre for Research & Development of Scientific Instruments (CRDSI).
Collaborations

The department is having close collaboration with a number of National and International agencies including DRDO, ISRO, DAE, CSIR, DST, and SERB. Department Faculties also have collaborations with various Institutes of National and International repute, namely TIFR, IIT Bombay, IIT Gandhinagar, IIT BHU, Central University of Rajasthan, University of Montreal, Canada, University of Warsaw Poland, Brookhaven National Laboratory USA, ETH Zurich Switzerland, IMEM Parma Italy, INFN Turino, Italy, CMU Pittsburgh USA, Belle II KEK Japan etc.


Latest News

Sr. No. 	Description
1 	Provisionally Selected and Waitlisted Candidates for Ph.D. Admission - Academic Year 2025 - 26 (Semester I)
2 	List of Shortlisted Candidates for PhD Admission 2025-26, Department of Physics
3 	Provisionally Selected Candidates for AY 2024-25 Semester II Ph.D. Admission in Physics
4 	PhD admission (2024-Sem II); List of Candidates shortlisted for Written/Interview
5 	Ph.D. admission (AY2024-25, Semester I): The List of Provisionally Selected Candidates (Click here)
6 	Ph.D. admission (AY 2024-25, Semester I): Shortlisted Candidates for Written test/ Interview 

1. B.S. in Physics with Specialization

A Unique Undergraduate Program
Introduction

Our BS program is designed for highly motivated students interested in basic science and cutting-edge technologies in the broad discipline of physics blended with engineering and wishes for a flexible program to consider a variety of challenging career paths through capability-linked specializations in Energy, Photonics, Plasma Technologies, Quantum Technologies and Entrepreneurship.


Objectives

1 | An academic path to..

    Enter into the graduate programs (e.g. MS or Ph.D.)
    Research in fundamental and technology/application oriented domains
    Career in scientific or academic profession


2 | An industrial path to..

    R&D in relevant industries 
    Leadership through lifelong learning


3 | An entrepreneurial path to..

    Entrepreneurship as specialization (SME)
    Develop new technologies based products
    Initiate Deep Tech start-up companies

Fellowships

For candidates with AIR under 5000 in combined merit rank (JEE Advanced)

    S N Bose Fellowship of 50,000/- INR per semester, consistent with 8.0 or above CGPA in all semesters.
    One fully paid International Conference/Internship (2-month duration during Summer Term)


Specialization

Our Physics BS students explore subjects critical to advancement in today’s needs from everyday common know-how to critical problems in different inter/multi-disciplinary domains using the fundamental and applied physics knowledge blended for present and future complex issues/challenges. One of the key salient features of the BS Physics program at the IIT Jodhpur is that the curriculum offers enormous flexibility to students for pursuing capability-linked specializations of their choice. The Department’s core specializations are designed to enable students to lead future technological innovations addressing the emerging industrial and societal challenges in following domains.

    The 4-year degree program also offers additional opportunity to pursue diverse and challenging carrier options for e.g. in Entrepreneurship (#5), who will be getting experience in converting their ideas into deep-tech start ups.
    A B.S. student having opted for specific specialization with CGPA 6 or more at the end of the 7th semester and fulfilling minimum credit requirements may be allowed to switch to B.S.- M. Tech. dual degree program in the chosen specialization at the beginning of the 8th semester.


1 | Advanced Energy Materials

    Energy harvesting materials and devices
    Utilization of renewable and non-renewable energy sources
    Optimized devices
    Exploration of future applications


2 | Plasma Technologies

    Plasma-based controlled thermonuclear fusion
    Industrial plasma applications
    Laser plasma and accelerators

3 | Photonics

    Deep insights to emerging photonics technologies (ultra-fastchips, mid-infrared lasers etc)
    Redefining Quantum Technology (Photonic Devices as Fundamental Components)
    Tera-hertz (THz) technologies for imaging, sensing and communications


4 | Quantum Technologies

    Femtosecond Lasers Facility (Study of higher entangled photons)
    Acquire skill-sets in various domains;
        Quantum Computing
        Quantum Communication
        Quantum Sensing
        Quantum Materials

5 | Entrepreneurship

    Offered by school of management (SME) IIT Jodhpur
    Placement opportunities
    Acquire skills in various entrepreneurship areas
        Starting up a new Venture
        Ideation & Prototyping
        New Venture Financing, Business Plan Phase-I and Phase II
        IPR & Legal Issues for Start-ups
        Systems Engineering and Project Management

Unique Features

    Technology oriented science program and specialization in physics based emerging technology domains.
    Strong foundations of fundamental as well as applied concepts of physics enabling to excel in physics driven technologies
    Flexible Curriculum Integrating Engineering Design aspect.
    Translating projects and ideas into Innovation through startup, technology park or industry collaborations.
    Emphasis on theoretical concepts, computational skills and hands-on experience.
    Interdisciplinary research and product development ecosystem.
    Common first year courses with B.Tech. programs and opportunityâ?ª of changing to B.Tech. program.

Graduate attributes

The Graduates of the UG program in Physics are expected to have the following attributes:

    Strong foundations of fundamental as well as applied concepts of physics enabling to excel in physics driven technologies.
    Ability to acquire new knowledge of physics and integrate with engineering concepts to create new and innovative technologies for current and future applications.
    Ability to apply critical scientific thinking and engineering skills to identify, formulate, and solve complex problems in applied areas blended with engineering practices.
    Ability to apply principles of physics in the domain of Energy materials and devices with a focus on generation, storage and management.
    Ability to engage and actively participate in the upcoming areas of Quantum Information and related research domains of Quantum Technologies.
    Preparedness to participate in future technological developments in photonics and optical communications beyond 5G including Terahertz technology.
    Ability to compete effectively in a world of rapid technological advancements and assume leadership roles within academic, industrial, or entrepreneurial environments.
    Aware of ethical issues, societal needs, and problems and conduct themselves as responsible professionals.

Learning outcomes

The Graduates of the UG program in Physics will be able:

    To acquire knowledge of fundamental and applied physics principles along with the required understanding of computing, mathematics, and engineering.
    To create, select, and apply appropriate techniques, resources, and fundamental physics tools to solve complex engineering problems with an understanding of the limitations through laboratory exercises and design projects.
    To apply the concepts of mathematics, physics including Quantum technologies and advanced computing tools, to design complex engineering systems containing hardware and software (including Quantum algorithms) modules.
    To acquire knowledge of fundamental and advanced concepts of Photonics and Terahertz technologies for communications, devices towards medical applications, sensing, quantum technologies, spectroscopy and imaging.
    To gain an in-depth understanding of concepts of materials and devices for energy generation and storage, integration of energy sub-systems and next generation communications.
    To perform a critical literature review and patent landscaping for innovative research.
    To understand professional ethics and social responsibilities.
    To develop technical presentation skills and communicate effectively.
    To develop an attitude for product design and entrepreneurial activities.

2. B.Tech (First Year)

The Department is also actively engaged in teaching regular physics course viz. Electromagnetism and Optics (PHL1010) to B.Tech. I year students. The Department is also offering Preparatory Physics Courses (PHL0010 and PHL0020) at IIT Jodhpur catering to the requirements of the students of various IITs. Also, B.Tech. I Year students perform some interesting experiments in the Physics Laboratory Course (PHP1010). This course is of immense importance wherein the students are able to understand and appreciate that how the physical principles are important for various engineering disciplines and how they can be applied in various engineering problems. Strong emphasis is given on two very important aspects viz. (i) fundamental principles of physics for each of the experiments and (ii) proper recording of the observations and their documentation. Additionally, various compulsory and elective courses offered by the Department are also open to B.Tech. students as elective courses. From the large pool of courses relating to Fundamental Physics, Multidisciplinary Science & Technology and Engineering Physics, the students can register for the courses of their choice subject to fulfillment of necessary guidelines given in the Academic Regulations of the Institute.

Postgraduate Program 


Department of Physics at IIT Jodhpur is offering following two post-graduate programs

    M.Sc. (Physics) – 2 years
    MSc (Physics)-M.Tech. (Materials Engineering) Dual Degree Program - 4 years

1. M.Sc. (Physics) – 2 years


Introduction

The Department of Physics at IIT Jodhpur is offering a 2-year M.Sc. program. The candidates to this program are admitted through JAM examination. The main objective of the program is to create a pool of professionals with very strong fundamentals in the domain of physics. Based on the experience of teaching advanced physics for the past several years, the Department has evolved a unique combination of program structure, courses and teaching pedagogy which not only allows the students to acquire in-depth learning of the concepts of physics and their application potential but also gives them freedom to choose the courses as per their interests from the large pool of elective courses being offered by the Department. These electives can be from three different sets of the courses viz. advanced level fundamental physics, multidisciplinary science and technology and engineering physics.

The program gives strong emphasis on the experiential learning aspects. As many as four labs and two hands-on courses are offered in the first year itself. In the hands-on exercise the students are given some interesting problems of physics. These problems are designed in a way that students learn to apply the concept of physics, make use of innovative approaches and develop creative thinking. Such activities provide much needed practical learning which help the students to effectively comprehend the complex theoretical concepts of physics. After completion of the program the students would have acquired the knowledge and skill sets to pursue their career, as per their interest, in the directions like advanced level research in fundamental and applied physics, R&D in multidisciplinary science & technology, higher education in engineering domains or availing job opportunities in government, public and private sectors.

Objective

The major objective of the programme is to bring out professionals having knowledge of basic laws of nature together with strong fundamentals in the core area of physics viz. Classical Mechanics, Quantum Mechanics, Condensed Matter Physics, Electromagnetism, Computational Physics, Statistical Physics, Electronics, Atomic and Nuclear Physics and advanced level topics such as Quantum Information Processing, Quantum Computing, High Energy Physics, Astrophysics, Plasma Physics, Nanotechnology, Nonlinear Optics, etc. Further objective of the program is to inculcate certain specific enabling skill sets to prepare the students to take up challenges in any one or more functional domains viz.

(i) Academics;

(ii) Basic and Applied Research;

(iii) Research & Development;

(iv) Engineering & Technology and

(v) Industry.


Expected Graduate Attributes

    In depth understanding of the fundamental concepts of physics.
    Ability to undertake problems in multidisciplinary domains of Science & Technology viz. Space Science, Medical Physics, Plasma Science, Quantum Technologies, Advanced Materials Science, Computational Techniques, etc.
    Ability to apply the acquired knowledge of Physics to Engineering Problems.
    Understanding of basic tools of computational physics and their application in various domains of physics and engineering.
    Ability to perform the experiments and analyze the experimental data based on acquired knowledge in the domains of electronics, atomic and nuclear physics, condensed matter physics, optics and Lasers, and other advanced topics.
    Skills to demonstrate basic principles of physics by use of simple experimental as well as high end experimental techniques.
    Ability to develop advanced functional materials and carry out their characterization.
    Ability to design, fabricate and characterize device structures such as sensors, solar cells, optical components, etc. for various applications.
    Ability to make effective oral and written technical communication.
    Appreciation and adherence to norms of professional ethics. 


Learning Outcomes

    Knowledge and deep understanding of principles of basic and applied physics.
    Subject knowledge to pursue higher studies in the advanced physics areas, such as, High Energy Physics, Astrophysics, Quantum Information Processing, Nanotechnology, Plasma Technology, Nonlinear Optics, Fibre Optics, etc.
    Knowledge of fabrication and characterization of devices, such as, solar cells, gas sensor, energy storage, magnetic data storage, etc.
    Skills in certain experimental techniques for characterization of materials for their structural, morphological, surface topology, electrical, magnetic, dielectric and optical properties.
    Knowledge and skills to use various vacuum based techniques for development of thin film-based materials, structures, and plasma devices and systems.
    Technical knowledge and skills to understand and appreciate interdisciplinary research topics.
    Skills in computational physics for wide range of applications ranging from the visualization of physical theories and process, design of functional materials, simulation and modelling of optical processes, etc.
    Written and Oral technical communication skills. 


Duration: 2 years

Proposed Intake: 38 (including EWS)

Eligibility: JAM (Physics) qualified candidates will be considered as per the existing norms of M.Sc. (Physics) program. For details click here.
2. MSc (Physics)-M.Tech. (Materials Engineering) Dual Degree Program - 4 years


Introduction

Addressing present day technological challenges in the emerging areas of energy, water, security, defense, healthcare, space, etc. requires an inter-disciplinary approach, integrating scientific concepts with innovative engineering skills, towards problem solving. IIT Jodhpur is also committed to adopt this approach and has taken initiative to offer an M.Sc. (Physics)-M.Tech. (Materials Engineering) Dual Degree Program which will meet the human resources needs of the country to address the technological challenges in the domain of Materials Engineering. Here, the M.Sc. Physics program emphasizes on fundamental aspects of physics and materials science and the Materials Engineering focuses on designing, processing, and controlling the materials structure to attain desired properties for small- and large-scale production of advanced materials, components and materials systems exhibiting planned performance.

The M.Sc. (Physics)-M.Tech. (Materials Engineering) program aims to produce professionals possessing adequate depth in subject knowledge in physics and materials and provide necessary experimental and computational skills to solve problems in a variety of domains in Materials Engineering. After the end of the dual-degree program, the graduates will have the necessary skills to solve Materials Engineering problems, based on scientific principles, for industrial needs and to carry out scientific research.


Objective

To provide science undergraduate students with in-depth knowledge of physics and materials engineering and train them to meet the skills necessary for industry, scientific research, and academia.

The outcomes of this dual degree program are:

    To enable understanding of the current challenges of materials in different technological domains
    To Develop analytical, experimental and computational skills to provide solutions to materials related issues
    Design and development of advanced materials for futuristic technologies
    Systems’ approach to integrate the designed and developed novel materials for realizing the technological prototypes for various industrial purposes 


Duration: 4 years

Proposed Intake: 13 (including EWS)

Eligibility: JAM (Physics) qualified candidates will be considered as per the existing norms of M.Sc. (Physics) program.

                  For details click here.

Assistantship: Students with cumulative grade point average, CGPA, of 8.0 or more at the end of M.Sc. (Physics) program will be eligible for assistantship during the M.Tech. program as per the MHRD norms.

Curriculum: Students will follow M.Sc. (Physics) curriculum during the first two years. After completion of the two years M.Sc. (Physics) program, the students will be automatically enrolled for the M.Tech. (Materials Engineering) program. During the last two years, the students will follow the M.Tech. (Materials Engineering) curriculum. Both degrees will be awarded together to the candidate after the successful completion of both the programs. The conceptual curricula for M.Sc. (Physics), and M.Tech. (Materials Engineering) are available on the following links.

    M.Sc. (Physics) ( Download file)
    M.Tech. (Materials Engineering) ( Download file) 

For queries regarding admission, please contact, Chairman, Department Admission Committee: Dr Satyajit Sahu (e-mail: satyajit@iitj.ac.in)


Doctoral Program

The Ph.D. program of the Department is uniquely designed to train students with required abilities viz. deep technical knowledge, technical communication skills (both oral and written), understanding of intellectual property issues and general writing skills so as to enable them to effectively manage their professional requirement at respective work places. Department has a unique combination of young and experienced faculty having high research profile in the respective domains. Department provides opportunities to the student to pursue advanced research in a wide range of new and emerging research domains including the following:

    Advanced Multi-functional Materials and Devices
    Astrophysics
    Computational Condensed Matter Physics
    High Energy Particle Physics
    Materials for Energy Harvesting and Storage
    Materials & Technologies for Strategic Applications
    Molecular Devices
    Nanoscience & Nanotechnology
    Non-linear Optics
    Photonics
    Plasma Physics and Cold Plasma Technology
    Quantum Computing and Information
    Quantum Optics
    Soft Matter Physics 


The high level of research is enabled by a motivated group of expert faculty members supported by a large pool of high-end advanced research equipments and computational facilities.


Some of the salient features of the Ph.D. program are as under:

    Opportunities to pursue multidisciplinary as well as transdisciplinary research
    Provision to have more than one supervisor from same or different subject streams
    Opportunities for participation in international collaborative projects
    Financial support to participate in International and National conferences
    Opportunity to use any laboratory facility of parent department as well as of any other department of the institute
    Access to equipment at Centre for Advanced Scientific Equipment (CASE)
    Access to Central Supercomputer for advanced computational work Access to large number of software resources including MATLAB, Mathematica, ANSYS, HFSS, etc.
    Compulsory Audit Course in IP Landscaping
    24x7 Access to large volume of Journals and other technical literature through Institute Knowledge Centre
    Compulsory course on Technical Communication Skills 


For queries regarding admission, please contact, Chairman, Department Admission Committee: Dr Satyajit Sahu (e-mail: satyajit@iitj.ac.in)

Ram Prakash

Biography

Prof. Ram Prakash is a plasma physicist and currently serving as a Professor in the Department of Physics at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur. He joined IIT jodhpur as an Associate Professor in the year 2019. He earned his Ph.D. in Plasma Physics from the Centre of Plasma Physics–Institute for Plasma Research (CPP-IPR), Guwahati (a DAE, GoI Unit) in the year 2002. He worked on ADITYA Tokamak as Post-Doctoral Fellow at Institute for Plasma Research, Gandhinagar during 2002-2004. Later worked as Faculty at Birla Institute of Technology, Mesra during 2004-2011. During 2006-2007, he also worked at Max-Planck Institute for Plasmaphysik, Garching, Germany on ASDEX Upgrade Tokamak as Guest Scientist under BOYSCAST Fellowship scheme of Govt. of India. Prior to his current assignment, he worked as Senior Scientist and Principal Scientist at CSIR-Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute (CSIR-CEERI), Pilani, and was group leader in the Plasma Devices Lab during 2011-2017. He established CSIR-CEERI's Incubation-cum-Innovation Hub, Jaipur Centre and IIT Jodhpur’s Technology Innovation and Start-up Centre, and was the first Scientist-in-charge and Faculty-in-charge during 2017-2019 and 2019-2021, respectively. He was also the first faculty-in-charge of IIT Jodhpur Technology Park during 2021-2023 and has mentored three start-ups. Further, he has served as Dean of Infrastructure Planning(DoIP) at IIT Jodhpur during Sept 2023 - Aug 2025.


He has been honoured with several prestigious awards including the PSSI Jaidutt Saraswati Sodha Award (2022), SERC Fast Track Young Scientist Award (2003), BOYSCAST Fellowship (2005), and CSIR-CEERI’s Foundation Day Award for Excellence in Research (2018). He is one of the editors of Nature: Scientific Reports Journal, was a Vice-President of the Plasma Science Society of India during 2022–2024, and was also a scientific consultant to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Vienna in the year 2009. His contributions to science communication in Hindi are well-known and he received a Vishesh Vaigyanik Rajbhasha Vishishtha Samman in the year 2012.

Research

Prof. Ram Prakash is currently working on low temperature plasma applications and spearheading the development of a state-of-the-art Cold Plasma Laboratory aimed at delivering innovative, plasma-based solutions in the fields of health, food, energy, and agriculture. His team has made significant research contributions using cold plasmas for clean air, water purity, environmental safety, and efficient energy systems. The unique aspects of his work are related to innovations that have involved design, development, and translation of fundamental research into devices and systems that can be used in the field by common man and industries. He has successfully developed six technologies -Four technologies for commercialization by industries and two technologies for strategic sectors. The work done on novel Cold-plasma Detergent in Environment (CODE) Device for better indoor air quality, Advanced Photocatalytic Oxidation Systems to fight COVID-19 pandemic, Mercury-Free-Plasma UV-lamps for efficient water disinfection, VUV-spectrometer-detector system calibration source useful for tokamak machines, Radial Multi-channel High-current Pseudospark Switch useful for high pulse power applications, Sheet-beam Plasma Cathode Electron Gun useful for THz microwave generation are a few of them to mention.

Monika Sinha

Biography

I am currently an associate professor in the Department of Physics, IIT Jodhpur. I have joined IIT Jodhpur as an assistant professor in 2011. Before joining IIT jodhpur, I worked as an Alexander von Humboldt fellow in Institute of Theoretical Physics, J. W. Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany. Prior to that I worked as Centenary Fellow in department of Physics, Indian Institute of Science (IISc.), Bangalore, India for one year. I was a research associate in Theory Division of Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, Kolkata India for three years. I obtained my Ph. D. degree from Jadavpur University in 2006.

Research

I work on interface of nuclear-particle physics and astrophysics. My interests in in compact stellar objects composed of highly dense matter. It focusses on the application of dense matter model to the astrophysical observables. The research field covers Pulsars, Magentars, X-ray binaries

Jitendra Kumar

Biography

Dr. Jitendra Kumar is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Physics at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. He joined the institute in February 2023. Prior to this, he was a postdoctoral fellow at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU), Pittsburgh, USA (from 2018), and he continued at CMU as a Special Faculty Researcher until early 2023. At CMU, he worked on the Belle II experiment at SuperKEKB, Japan, where he contributed to the development and analysis of the Central Drift Chamber and conducted studies in flavor physics. Belle II is one of the world’s leading experiments in precision flavor physics, aiming to test the Standard Model and search for signs of new physics through rare decays and CP violation measurements. Dr. Jitendra is part of the Belle II Collaboration from IIT Jodhpur.

His doctoral research, conducted in collaboration with the ALICE (A Large Ion Collider Experiment) experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), CERN, Switzerland, focused on heavy-flavor azimuthal correlations in high-energy proton-proton collisions. ALICE is a major experiment at the LHC dedicated to studying the quark-gluon plasma and the properties of strongly interacting matter under extreme conditions. Following his Ph.D., degree Dr. Jitendra served as a Research Associate and Project Scientist at IIT Bombay.

Research

Key areas;

    Flavour Physics
    Hadron spectroscopy and QCD
    AI/ML in High-Energy Physics
    Detector studies 

Dr. Jitendra’s research group at IIT Jodhpur is working on experimental high-energy particle physics, with a primary focus on flavor physics (e.g., LFUV, CP violation, rare decays) at the Belle II experiment. He also works on hadron spectroscopy (e.g., pentaquarks) to investigate the dynamics of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) in the non-perturbative regime. In addition, the group investigates the application of AI/ML techniques to enhance data analysis and search for rare processes or beyond-the-standard-model (BSM) physics. His group is also exploring quantum measurement concepts for precision measurements and foundational aspects of particle physics. 

Jitendra Kumar

Biography

Dr. Jitendra Kumar is Joint Faculty in the Department of Physics and the Department of Metallurgical & Materials Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur. He completed his B.Tech. in Electronics & Communication Engineering from Uttar Pradesh Technical University, Lucknow, in 2009, followed by an M.Tech. in Nanotechnology from the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee in 2011. Dr. Kumar earned his Ph.D. from the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur in 2019, where his research focused on the synthesis and characterization of solution-processed Cu2ZnSnS4 thin films for solar cell applications. After completing his Ph.D., Dr. Kumar worked as an Institute Postdoctoral Fellow at the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi until 2020. During this tenure, his research primarily focused on the synthesis of inorganic perovskite nanocubes (CsPbIxBr3-x) using a hot-injection technique for solar cell applications. From 2020 to 2023, he held a postdoctoral position at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel, where his research centered on (BixSb1-x)2Se3-based solar cells. Between August 2023 and April 2025, he served as an INSPIRE Faculty at IIT Dhanbad, leading research on BaZrS3 thin-film solar cells. In February and March 2025, he was Marie Curie Fellow at INL – International Iberian Nanotechnology Laboratory. Dr. Kumar has received several prestigious honors, including the Marie Sklodowska-Curie Award in 2024 and the Marie Sklodowska-Curie Seal of Excellence in 2023. He was also awarded the INSPIRE Faculty Fellowship in 2023. Additionally he received international travel grants from EPFL and DST, which enabled him to present his research in Switzerland in 2021 and in the USA in 2018. He won the Best Poster Presentation Award at the IEEE Conference in Bangalore in 2018. Dr. Kumar has actively participated in and presented his work at numerous international conferences. Furthermore, he has been a visiting researcher at Martin Luther University, Halle-Wittenberg, Germany, in 2015 and at the Centre for Nanoscience & Engineering at the Indian Institute of Science Bangalore in 2014.

Research

Our research group is dedicated to the exploring advanced materials for energy applications, with a special emphasis on the development of inorganic thin-film solar cells. We strive to contribute to a sustainable future by advancing the innovation in materials design, fabrication and device engineering. Feel free to explore our work, meet our team, and join us in building a cleaner and greener future. To learn more about our research, please visit research group webpage

Lata Panwar

Biography

Dr. Lata Panwar is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Physics at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur. She joined the institute in April 2025. She earned her B.Sc. (Hons.) and M.Sc. degrees in Physics from the University of Rajasthan (2011 - 2014, 2014 - 2016), and completed her Ph.D. in Experimental High Energy Particle Physics at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore, in 2022. Her doctoral research, under the supervision of Dr. Jyothsna Rani Komaragiri, focused on searches for nonresonant and resonant Di-Higgs production at 13 TeV using proton-proton collision data from the CMS detector at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), CERN.

Following her Ph.D., Dr. Panwar pursued postdoctoral research at the Laboratoire de Physique Nucléaire et des Hautes Énergies (LPNHE)-CNRS-Sorbonne Université / Université Paris Cité, working with the ATLAS collaboration. She collaborated with Dr. Bogdan Malaescu, Dr. Luc Poggioli and Dr. Reina Camacho Toro on deriving in situ Jet Energy Scale (JES) calibrations for ATLAS and on Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) and Lund Jet Plane studies at ATLAS and at the proposed Future Circular Collider-electron-positron (FCC-ee) experiment. At IIT Jodhpur, Dr. Panwar is building a dynamic research group in Experimental High Energy Physics, focusing on Higgs and Jet Physics at the LHC and FCC.

Research

Our research group at IIT Jodhpur is a growing team engaged in cutting-edge research in the field of Experimental High Energy Physics (EHEP). We are actively involved in exploring fundamental aspects of particle physics through both current and future collider experiments. Our primary research interests include:

    Jet performance studies
    Data analyses using LHC datasets, with a focus on Higgs and QCD physics, including the application of modern techniques such as machine learning
    Projection and feasibility studies for the proposed Future Circular Collider (FCC) 

We invite enthusiastic students and researchers to collaborate with us and contribute to the growing landscape of experimental high energy physics. 

Naveen Kumar Tailor

About

Dr. Naveen Kumar Tailor is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Physics at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur (IITJ), where he joined in October 2025. Before taking up this position, he served as a Fulbright-Nehru Postdoctoral Fellow at Northwestern University, Evanston, USA, working with renowned materials scientist Prof. Mercouri Kanatzidis on cutting-edge research in energy materials and semiconductor devices.

Dr. Tailor earned his Ph.D. in Physics from the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, where his research was recognized with the Excellence in Doctoral Research Award in 2023. His academic journey began with an M.Sc. in Physics from the University of Rajasthan, Jaipur, in 2017.

Dr. Tailor has authored over 55 journal publications and holds two granted patents. One of his notable research outcomes has been highlighted by Nature India, reflecting the societal and scientific relevance of his work. He has been honored with several prestigious international fellowships, including the Fulbright-Nehru Postdoctoral Fellowship, the JSPS Fellowship (Japan), and the Humboldt Fellowship (Germany). He is serving as a reviewer in various scientific journals.

He is widely recognized for his collaborative research approach, academic excellence, and active engagement in leadership and extracurricular activities, reflecting his commitment to impactful science and societal development.

Research

We are a young and dynamic research team working at the forefront of experimental physics. Driven by curiosity and sustained by creativity, our group is committed to advancing scientific knowledge while developing novel technologies that address societal needs. We believe that research is most impactful when it bridges fundamental science with practical applications, especially in areas that contribute to sustainability and a cleaner energy future.

Our work combines laboratory experimentation, device engineering, spectroscopy, and computational tools to explore materials, interfaces, and energy conversion mechanisms. With a strong interdisciplinary approach, we aim to create solutions that support global energy demands, healthcare advancements, environmental protection, and next-generation optoelectronic technologies.


Our Major Research Areas

Solar Energy and Photovoltaics

    Perovskite solar cells (3D, 2D–3D, and tandem architectures)
    Tandem solar cells combining perovskite–silicon and perovskite–CIGS technologies
    Emerging concepts in silicon solar cells
    Building-integrated photovoltaics (BIPV) and Agrivoltaics
    Space photovoltaics for extreme radiation environments
    Solar thermal systems and energy storage integration 


X-ray Detectors & Imaging

    Medical diagnostics
    Security scanning and border inspection
    High-energy and hard radiation detection using lead-free halide crystals and semiconductor materials 


Photodetectors & IR Imaging

    Broadband photodetectors
    Infrared detectors for imaging, surveillance, and night-vision applications
    Device engineering for high sensitivity, low noise, and faster response 


Carbon Capture & CO₂ Conversion

    Photo-catalytic and photo-electrochemical CO₂ reduction
    Conversion of CO₂ into value-added fuels and chemicals
    Development of catalysts and interface engineering for higher efficiency 


Green Hydrogen Technologies

    Water electrolysis and hydrogen evolution reactions (HER)
    Design of high-performance electrode and catalyst materials
    Scalable electrolyzer development for green hydrogen production 


Ultrafast Transient Spectroscopy

    Light–matter interaction dynamics in emerging semiconductor and quantum materials
    Carrier cooling, phonon interactions, defect states, and interfacial kinetics 


Fundamental Materials Physics: Using electrical and optical spectroscopy along with structural correlation studies, we probe:

    Band structure and carrier transport
    Defect dynamics, exciton behavior, and electron-phonon coupling
    Charge recombination and ion migration in halide perovskites and related materials 


Computational & Device Simulations

    Solar and optoelectronic device optimization
    Optical modeling, charge transport simulations, and interface engineering
    Predicting material properties and device behavior 


We warmly welcome dedicated, motivated, and enthusiastic students to become part of our research group. Our group offers a collaborative environment where students can develop strong scientific skills, gain hands-on laboratory experience, and contribute to impactful research aimed at solving real-world challenges. If you are interested in joining us, please reach out with your latest CV/resume, along with a brief statement of your research interests.

We look forward to working with passionate minds and nurturing future researchers!

Sagar Kumar Verma

About

Dr. Sagar Kumar Verma joined the Department of Physics at the Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur (IITJ) as an Assistant Professor in October 2025. Before joining IITJ, he served as a Postdoctoral Research Faculty in the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at Oregon State University (OSU), Corvallis, USA.

Dr. Verma obtained his Ph.D. and M.Tech. degrees in Photonics from the Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee (IITR) in January 2024 and June 2019, respectively. He began his academic journey with a B.Sc. (2013) and an M.Sc. (2015) in Physics from Chaudhary Charan Singh University, Meerut, India.

In recognition of his research excellence, Dr. Verma was awarded the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship in August 2025 — one of the most prestigious and competitive international fellowships. Earlier, in July 2025, he also received the Institute Postdoctoral Fellowship offer from the University of California, Irvine, USA, for his significant contributions to the field of Nanophotonics. He is serving as a reviewer in various scientific journals, including Plasmonics, Optics Letters, Applied Optics, Journal of the Optical Society of America: A (JOSA A), Journal of the Optical Society of America: B (JOSA B), Optics Express, Optical Material Express, OSA Continuum, Nanotechnology, IEEE Sensors Journal, International Journal of Optics, Optics Communications, Optical and Quantum Electronics and Scientific Reports. He is also contributing as a Reviewing Editor in the Springer Nature Publishing group.

Research

Dr. Verma’s research focuses on the frontier areas of Applied Meta-Optics, Advanced Nanophotonics, and Adaptive Manufacturing. His research group at IIT Jodhpur is committed not only to advancing the fundamental understanding of light–matter interaction at the nanoscale but also to translating these innovations into real-world technologies for societal benefit. His group’s research interests include:

Advanced Nanophotonics: Dr. Verma’s work in nanophotonics aims to design and fabricate plasmonic and dielectric metasurfaces that uncover the intricate physics of light manipulation at subwavelength scales. His research explores several advanced optical phenomena, including:

    Surface Lattice Resonances (SLRs)
    Gap Plasmons (GPs)
    Extraordinary Optical Transmission (EOT)
    Electromagnetically Induced Transparency (EIT)
    Bound States in the Continuum (BIC)
    Fano Resonances
    Surface-Enhanced Infrared Absorption (SEIRA)
    Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS)
    Surface-Enhanced Fluorescence (SEF) 

His group applies these nanophotonic principles across diverse applications such as chemical and biosensing, spectral filtering, photodetection, smart thermal coatings for heat protection, tunable light emission, and infrared up-conversion for efficient energy harvesting.

Ultrafast Optics: Dr. Verma also investigates ultrafast optical phenomena to probe time-resolved dynamics in novel materials and nanostructures. By employing advanced techniques such as Time-Domain Thermoreflectance (TDTR), Transient Absorption, and Transient Fluorescence Spectroscopy, his research provides insights into thermal transport and charge-carrier dynamics in emerging 2D materials, integrated with nanophotonic architectures to exploit enhanced electromagnetic field interactions.

Adaptive Manufacturing: In the realm of adaptive manufacturing, Dr. Verma’s group focuses on optimizing Laser Sintering Techniques for the fabrication of printed electronic devices, particularly aimed at In-space applications. This work bridges photonics, materials science, and manufacturing technology to realize scalable and high-performance optoelectronic systems.

Vision: Through a multidisciplinary approach that unites fundamental optics, nanoscale engineering, and advanced fabrication, Dr. Verma’s group aspires to develop next-generation meta-optical devices and nanophotonic technologies that push the boundaries of light manipulation and enable transformative innovations in sensing, energy, and quantum photonics.

Note: Dr. Verma’s group welcomes passionate students and researchers with innovative ideas to pursue their research aspirations and contribute to advancing the future of Optics and Photonics. Interested candidates are encouraged to reach out for short-term internships, Ph.D. opportunities, or self-sponsored positions by sharing their CVs.

Sunita

Biography

I have joined Dept. of Physics, IIT Jodhpur in September 2022 as an Assistant Professor. Prior to that, I worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China, and the University of Lisbon, Portugal with Prof. Nuno Araujo and Prof. Margarida Telo Gamma. In JNCASR, Bangalore, I worked as a research associate with Prof. Subir K Das. I received doctoral degree in Physics ​from Banaras Hindu University. During my PhD, I have constructed the first thermodynamics model to analyze the nonlinear dielectric effect and the effect of pressure on the structure and properties of the achiral, bent-core, and ferroelectric liquid crystals.

Research

Our group focus on understanding the physical mechanisms underlying soft materials in biological perspectives and active matter systems. We aim to develop analytical, statistical mechanics, electrodynamics, and computational techniques to address the most exciting unsolved scientific challenges in these highly interdisciplinary fields. Current research topics include the following problems-

    Theoretical modeling of nature-inspired soft robots
    Electrostatics in biophysics and technical applications
    Liquid-liquid phase separation in biology
    Physics of Active(self propelled) particles
    Flow physics of micro-organisms
    Phase transitions in liquid crystals

Yogeshwar Nath Mishra

Biography

Dr. Yogeshwar Nath Mishra is an Assistant Professor at IIT Jodhpur. He earned his Ph.D. in Optics and Engineering Physics from Lund University, Sweden, in 2018, under the supervision of Prof. Edouard Berrocal, where he developed advanced laser diagnostics for probing optically dense media. He subsequently held postdoctoral and research scientist positions at FAU Erlangen in Germany, and jointly at the University of Gothenburg in Sweden and NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) in the USA.

He has been mentored by several globally renowned scientists and pioneers in their fields, including Prof. Lihong Wang (Caltech), Dr. Murthy Gudipati (NASA), and Prof. Wolfgang Heidrich (KAUST).

Dr. Mishra has received numerous accolades, including the Indian Academy of Sciences Summer Research Fellowship (2010), Visiting Student Fellowship from Raman Research Institute (2011), SPIE Student Author Travel Award (2012), PETRA Awards for Young Researchers - ILASS Europe (2013), ÅForsk Foundation Scholarship (2015), Invited Speaker, Gordon Research Conference (2017), Swedish Research Council International Postdoctoral Fellowship (2018), Adlerbert Foundation Sustainable Research Fellowship – Gothenburg (2022), Dr. K. Radhakrishnan Young Scientist Award (2023) from ISEES–IIT Kanpur, and the Young Researcher Award (2025, Runner-up) from Erlangen Graduate School in Advanced Optical Technologies, FAU Erlangen, Germany.

While at Caltech, he co-invented laser sheet compressed ultrafast photography (LS-CUP), a groundbreaking technique recognized as the World’s Fastest single-shot planar imaging method. This work, conducted under Prof. Lihong Wang, was among the top-downloaded articles in the prestigious Light: Science and Applications journal in 2023. More recently, he reported CUP2AI, recognized as the world’s fastest single-shot wide-field molecular mapping technique. His research has been featured in Physics World, Phys.org, EurekaAlert! (AAAS), Nature India, Swedish National Radio, Caltech,  The Hindu, The Indian Express, The Lallantop, Republic TV, among other national and international news outlets. Dr. Mishra has served as an Adjunct Faculty at IIT Indore, where he founded Fourier Energy Solutions Pvt. Ltd. along with his colleagues, focusing on developing smart optical solutions for energy technology and biomedical research.

Research

We are young and dynamic team engaged in cutting-edge research in Optics and Photonics. Our group thrives on curiosity, creativity, and collaboration as we explore both fundamental science and real-world applications of optical technologies for a sustainable future and the benefit of society. Our research includes:

    Laser Diagnostics in engines, fuel cells, and photovoltaic systems.
    Ultrafast Science, focusing on light-matter interaction dynamics.
    Space Science, including adaptive optics and thermal/hyperspectral imaging.
    Quantum Technologies, with a focus quantum-enhanced imaging techniques.
    Biomedical Imaging and Artificial Intelligence: lab-on-chip diagnostic platforms for biomedial applications.

We actively welcome enthusiastic students and researchers to join us. For internships, Ph.D. admissions, or self-sponsored positions, please contact with your CV. 

Ongoing Projects 
Hybrid Heterojunctions Based Stable and Efficient Photo-Rechargeable Li-Ion Batteries
Searching for New Physics beyond the Standard Model via studies of rare charm-decays at Belle II,
Macromolecules interactions mediated via complex ionic solution
A UV-light Sterilization System to treat N95 Filtering Face-mask Respirators for reuse
Application specific specialty optical fibers and towards 1D random  lasers in disordered optical lattices
Delivery of high power ultra-short optical pulses in mid-infrared    wavelength range  ( Download file)
Development of nanostructured Cu2ZnSn(S/Se)4 thin films and their  electronic properties for next generation solar photovoltaic applications   ( Download file)
Generation of entangled photons and its applications to Quantum  Computation and Information Processing  ( Download file)
Magnetars with superfluid core  ( Download file)
Photo-Rechargeable Organo-Halide Perovskite- Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Batteries  ( Download file)
Possibilities and device applications of degenerate optical microcavities.  ( Download file)
Quantum Heat Engines  ( Download file)
Sulphur nanoparticles Reinforced Hierarchical Assemblies of Carbon  nanotubes for Efficient Lithium-Sulphur Batteries.  ( Download file)
Synthesis and study of properties of electrochemically active composites based on lithium intercalated silicates of iron, manganese,cobalt and having high electron conductivity corbosilicides of transition metal  ( Download file) 	

Completed Projects
A study of quantum correlations: Squeezing and its various facets ( Download file)
Design and development of high capacity and low cost Li2TMSio4(TM=transition metals) silicate materials for future rechargeable lithium ion battery. ( Download file)
Development of Ferroelectric and their composite with hexaferrites for microwave absoption applications. ( Download file)
Development of high thermal conductivity PCM composites for thermal management ( Download file)
Development of III-Nitrides thin film(s) for high frequency saw device applications ( Download file)
Development of Plasmonic metal hybrid electrode system for II-VI quamtum dot sensitized solar cellls (QDSSCs) realization of cerriet multiplication for better efficiency ( Download file)
Graph Theoretical Aspects in Quantum Information processing ( Download file)
Hunting of new physics through b -> s transitions ( Download file)
Probing Magnetic Structures and Spin Flop transition in bulk and  nanostrutured FeVo4 Multoferroic System ( Download file)
Probing the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics in Neutrino Oscillations ( Download file)
Synchrony Based Evolution of Various Biological and Artificial Systems to Understand Complex Computational Aspects ( Download file)


Collaborations

In order to leverage the advantage of complementarity in terms of expertise and infrastructure, it is highly important to establish links with the much bigger world which lies outside the boundaries of the institute. It is therefore very important to tap all possible opportunities of collaborations not only with the academic institutes but also with other equally important stakeholders including funding agencies, R&D organizations and industries. In this pursuit, a number of collaborations have been established both at National as well as at International levels. Some of important collaborations are listed below:


International Collaborations

University of Montreal, Canada; Brookhaven National Laboratory, USA; CERN, Geneva, Switzerland

Autonoma U., Barcelona, Spain; University of Warsaw, Poland ; Lawrence Technol. U., USA,

Institute of Materials for Electronics and Magnetism, Parma, Italy; National Centre for Nuclear Research, Poland

Gamma Ray Astronomy PeV EnergieS phase-3 (GRAPES-3); Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

The University of Cambridge, UK ; The University of Manchester, UK; National Institute for Materials Science, Japan

Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, ISRAEL; Università degli Studi di Brescia, Italy; Mississippi University, USA

Okinawa Institute of Science & Technology Graduate University, Japan; La Plata University, Argentina


National Collaborations

Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), Mumbai; Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi

TIFR Center for Interdisciplinary Sciences, Hyderabad ; Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Thiruvananthapuram

Central University of Rajasthan, India; Indian Institute of Science Bangalore; Mahindra École Centrale, Hyderabad

Institute of Radio Physics & Electronics, University of Calcutta, Kolkata; JNU, New Delhi; Defence Laboratory Jodhpur

Indian Institute of Science and Educational Research, Bhopal; Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee

CSIR-Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute, Pilani; Institute for Plasma Research, Gandhinagar

Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC) Mumbai & Vizag; CSIR - Nantional Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur
